MSC2403: Add "knock" feature (#2403)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/2403-knock.md

be set from users who aren't currently in said room. An example for the membership would look as
follows:
```json
{
  "membership": "knock",
  "displayname": "Alice",
  "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/avatar",
  "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"
}
```

After a knock is received in a room it is expected to be displayed in the timeline, similar to other
membership changes. Clients can optionally add a way for users of a room to review all current
knocks. After a knock in a room a member of the room can invite the knocker.

To be able to implement this properly two new endpoints need to be added, one in the client-server
API and one in the server-server API.

## Restrictions
There are restrictions to being able to set this membership.

### Current membership
Only users without a current membership or with their current membership being "leave" can knock a
room. This means that a user that is banned or currently in the room can't knock on it.

### Join Rules
The `join_rule` of `m.room.join_rules` must be set to "invite". This means that people can't knock
in public rooms. Additionaly the new join rule "private" is introduced. This is so that people can,

> when creating a new room, prevent anyone from knocking.

Reviewer: Can't one just set the required power level to send a knock event to something about the default power level?

Author: Yes, we could. The join rules could be more easily exposed via UI, however, thus making the PL approach the advanced one while the join rules one is the simple setting, basically.

Author: Thoughts from others?

Reviewer 2: I'm inclined to agree that having two ways of doing things is going to lead to confusion.

I actually think it would make more sense just to use the join rules, rather than also having support in the power levels. The join rules currently control who can transition from `leave` to `join`: perhaps they should also control who can transition from `leave` to `knock`?

Author: The problem arises if you have e.g. knocking spam from one person and want to easily dissallow them to knock but still allow others to knock

Reviewer 2: ban the spammer?

as follows:

```
POST /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/%21d41d8cd%3Amatrix.org/knock  HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"
}
```

### Responses:
#### Status code 200:
The user knocked successfully. Empty reply:
```json
{}
```

#### Status code 403:
The user wasn't allowed to knock (e.g. they are banned). Error reply:
```json
{
  "errcode": "M_FORBIDDEN",
  "error": "The user isn't allowed to knock in this room."
}
```

## Server-Server API
The new endpoint for the server-server API is `PUT /_matrix/federation/v2/knock/{roomId}/{eventId}`.
The path parameters are the room id you want to knock and the event id of the knock event. The post
body consists of an `event` parameter, which is the knock event. A request could look as follows:

```
PUT /_matrix/federation/v2/knock/%21abc123%3Amatrix.org/%24abc123%3Aexample.org  HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "event": {
    "sender": "@alice:example.org",
    "origin": "example.org",
    "origin_server_ts": 1234567890,
    "type: "m.room.member",
    "state_key": "@alice:example.org",
    "content": {

>       "membership": "knock",

Reviewer: I'd put the `displayname` and `avatar_url` fields here just to show all possible fields for whoever puts this into the spec afterwards.

Author: Yes, they are meant to be optional here. Will update the MSC to reflect that better

    "type": "m.room.member",
    "state_key": "@alice:example.org",
    "content": {
      "membership": "knock",
      "displayname": "Alice",
      "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/avatar",
      "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"
    }
  }
}
```

#### Status code 400:
This request was invalid, e.g. bad JSON. Example reply:
```json
{
  "errcode": "M_UNKNOWN",
  "error": "An unknown error occurred"}
```

#### Status code 403:
The user wasn't allowed to knock. Error reply:
```json
{
  "errcode": "M_FORBIDDEN",
  "error": "The user isn't allowed to knock in this room."
}
```

# Potential issues
This new feature would allow users to spam rooms that they don't partake in. That is why this proposal
adds both the new join rule and the new power level, in order to allow room admins to mitigate such
potential spam.

# Alternatives
As for the join rule "invite", instead the join rule "knock" could be introduced, meaning the room
is like "invite" only that people can also knock. The difference is for existing rooms: With this
proposal people can knock in existing "invite" rooms, with the alternative suggestion they can't.

# Security considerations

> None. This doesn't allow users access to a room in any way.

Author: @yangm97 
> Gives me Habbo vibes...

what do you mean by this?

Reviewer 3: <img width="362" alt="Screen Shot 2020-01-14 at 15 26 17" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4412002/72371023-3bae2a00-36e2-11ea-90bb-a40cd5f71845.png">

This.

Author: It is up to the client how to visualize a knock. An event in the time line is way less intrusive than a popup.

Reviewer 3: I didn't try to make any point though, just stated the fact this MSC reminded me about Habbo (and about my childhood by extension).

# MSC2403: Add "knock" feature
Many people are in invite-only rooms. Sometimes, someone wants to join such a room and can't, as
they aren't invited. This proposal adds a feature for this user to indicate that they want to join
said room.

# Proposal
This proposal implements the reserved "knock" membership type for the `m.room.member` state event.
This state event indicates that a user knocks a room, that is asking for permission to join. It
contains an optional "reason" parameter to specify the reason you want to join. Like other

> memtership types the parameters "displayname" and "avatar_url" are optional. This membership can

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
membership types the parameters "displayname" and "avatar_url" are optional. This membership can
```

be set from users who aren't currently in said room. An example for the membership would look as
follows:
```json
{
  "membership": "knock",
  "displayname": "Alice",
  "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/avatar",
  "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"

> }

Author: Shouldn't the normal displayname deduping as outlined in how to render a displayname apply? Along with potential user interaction to see the full mxid? Like.....this isn't really anything new?

```

After a knock is received in a room it is expected to be displayed in the timeline, similar to other
membership changes. Clients can optionally add a way for users of a room to review all current
knocks. After a knock in a room a member of the room can invite the knocker.

To be able to implement this properly two new endpoints need to be added, one in the client-server
API and one in the server-server API.

## Restrictions
There are restrictions to being able to set this membership.

### Current membership
Only users without a current membership or with their current membership being "leave" can knock a
room. This means that a user that is banned or currently in the room can't knock on it.

### Join Rules

> The `join_rule` of `m.room.join_rules` must be set to "invite". This means that people can't knock

Author: It is briefly mentioned in the alternative approaches

in public rooms. Additionally the new join rule "private" is introduced. This is so that people can,
when creating a new room, prevent anyone from knocking.

### Power levels

> The default power level for "knock" is 0. If a user has a too low power level to knock they aren't

Reviewer 4: why not the invite power level?

> The default power level for "knock" is 0. If a user has a too low power level to knock they aren't

Author: because invite and knock are two fundamentally different things and so there is no real reason to combind their power level. It is like combinding ban and invite power level.

> The default power level for "knock" is 0. If a user has a too low power level to knock they aren't

Reviewer 4: sorry, not to combine, but to use the default. Instead of defaulting to zero, default to the `invite` power level.

> The default power level for "knock" is 0. If a user has a too low power level to knock they aren't

Author: but that is zero, too?

> The default power level for "knock" is 0. If a user has a too low power level to knock they aren't

Reviewer 4: sure, but if it changes then at least the room will be using the same default number. They seem related.

> The default power level for "knock" is 0. If a user has a too low power level to knock they aren't

Author: Doesn't seem that related to soru:

Imagine a room that is invite-only and you only want certain people to be able to invite others. So you raise the invite level. Then you are suddenly confused why you aren't receiving any knocks at all anymore.

> The default power level for "knock" is 0. If a user has a too low power level to knock they aren't

Reviewer 4: I guess, fair point.

as a way to limit who can knock and who can't.

#### Example:
`@alice:example.org` CAN knock, but `@bob:example.org` can't: The (incomplete) content of
`m.room.power_levels` is as follows:
```json
{
  "users": {
    "@alice:example.org": 1
  },
  "users_default": 0,
  "knock": 1
}
```

## Client-Server API
Two new endpoints are introduced in the client-server API (similarly to join):
`POST /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/knock` and `POST /_matrix/client/r0/knock/{roomIdOrAlias}`.

### `POST /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/knock`
The path parameter (`roomId`) is the room you want to knock. It is required. The post body accepts
an optional parameter, `reason`, which is the reason you want to join the room. A request could look
as follows:

```
POST /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/%21d41d8cd%3Amatrix.org/knock  HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"
}
```

#### Responses:
##### Status code 200:
The user knocked successfully. Empty reply:
```json
{}
```

##### Status code 400:
This request was invalid, e.g. bad JSON. Example reply:
```json
{
  "errcode": "M_UNKNOWN",

>   "error": "An unknown error occurred"}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "error": "An unknown error occurred"
}
```

that event format may differ between room versions.

Request format:

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-----------|------|-------------|
| Path parameters:
| roomId | string | Required. The room ID that should receive the knock.
| eventId | string | Required. The event ID for the knock event.

The JSON body is expected to be the full event.

Response Format:

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-----------|------|-------------|
| <body> | [integer, Empty Object] |

A request could look as follows:
```
PUT /_matrix/federation/v1/send_knock/%21abc123%3Amatrix.org/%24abc123%3Aexample.org HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "sender": "@someone:example.org",
  "origin": "matrix.org",
  "origin_server_ts": 1234567890,
  "type": "m.room.member",
  "state_key": "@someone:example.org",
  "content": {
    "membership": "knock",
    "displayname": "Alice",
    "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/avatar",
    "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"
  }
}
```

#### Response:
##### Status code 200:
The event was successfully accepted into the graph by the receiving homeserver.
```json
[
  200,
  {}
]
```

> # Potential issues

Reviewer 4: The proposal is missing how knocks come down `/sync`, and what clients should be rendering it as. Are we expecting that knocks are handled immediately by the room, or do we say that it ists in the room list for a while?

Author: The same as other membership changes? It doesn't seem relevant for this MSC as it just introduces a new membership type, and it is already covered how memberships come down `/sync`

Reviewer 4: Invites, joins, and kicks/leaves all come down different sections.

Author: Soru is confused: They all come down the normal event streem of the room, just as setting *any* state event does.

Reviewer 4: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1190097/74055486-05f61b80-49d8-11ea-91b2-fd151c565a4e.png)

Author: Ooooooh, you weren't talking about how the knock trips down into the room for people that are in it but for the one doing the knock. Currently the MSC doesn't cover the one doing the knock getting any feedback on that at all, as that would require the server to keep track of rooms that, well, it simply doesn't know/have

Reviewer 4: That's fine, that's why we're at the idea stage :p

Author: currently the knocker also gets no information on the room (room name + avatar) which would probably be needed when a client were to introduce a "knocked rooms" category, similarly to invites.

Reviewer 4: Yup, would definitely put that into the MSC.

Author: does it sound reasonable that, on a knock, the knocker receives all the invite state events? Wouldn't that leave a security consideration that information of the room is leaked outwards, that it might make more sense to define a new knock state events which is (not necessarily) a subset of the invite state events?

Author: Note to self: when adding this also keep in mind that the knock can be rejected (sending `leave` membership), that also needs to (potentially federate) to the homeserver and then land down `/sync`

Reviewer 4: the aesthetics of the room are probably fine, from my 30 seconds of security review.

This new feature would allow users to spam rooms that they don't partake in. That is why this proposal
adds both the new join rule and the new power level, in order to allow room admins to mitigate such
potential spam.

# Alternatives
As for the join rule "invite", instead the join rule "knock" could be introduced, meaning the room
is like "invite" only that people can also knock. The difference is for existing rooms: With this
proposal people can knock in existing "invite" rooms, with the alternative suggestion they can't.

The two endpoints for the client-server API seem redundant, this MSC followed how JOIN is working
currently: One "proper" endpoint (`/rooms/{roomId}/join`) and one to work properly over federation
(`/join/{roomIdOrAlias}`). They could both be merged into one, however, as that would also affect
the join endpoint it seems out-of-scope for this MSC.

> # Security considerations

Reviewer 4: The MSC needs to cover the transition from knock -> any other membership.

Author: How so? That doesn't change at all, if you join the room, you join it. If someone sends you a leave membership, you get that. It doesn't seem relevant for this MSC?

Reviewer 5: I agree that it would be useful to see a set of transition rules purely as an exercise to show that it works at all, even if it's obvious to you. When inserting another state for membership, we should be clear how it affects other memberships.

Reviewer 4: it also helps prove that it works, and makes it easier to spec

Author: Added this in!

# MSC2403: Add "knock" feature
Many people are in invite-only rooms. Sometimes, someone wants to join such a room and can't, as
they aren't invited. This proposal adds a feature for this user to indicate that they want to join
said room.

# Proposal
This proposal implements the reserved "knock" membership type for the `m.room.member` state event.
This state event indicates that a user knocks a room, that is asking for permission to join. It
contains an optional "reason" parameter to specify the reason you want to join. Like other
membership types the parameters "displayname" and "avatar_url" are optional. This membership can
be set from users who aren't currently in said room. An example for the membership would look as
follows:
```json
{
  "membership": "knock",
  "displayname": "Alice",
  "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/avatar",
  "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"

> }

Author: > If so, would that not be confusing to room admins if they let in "bob" and "alice" joins the room?

Not much different if they join and right after change their displayname / avatar_url. That is what mxids exist for.

> }

Reviewer: When you join and then change your details, a "bla changed their displayname" appears in the timeline. But I'm assuming you wouldn't get that if someone's membership is knock. So if someone knocks, changes their details, and then joins, you'd see:

```
"Bob would like to join"
*accept knock*
"Alice has joined the room"
```

Though, I guess if you instead included the mxid, you'd instead see:

```
"Bob (@bob:matrix.org) would like to join"
*accept knock*
"Alice (@bob:matrix.org) has joined the room"
```

then it's not so bad.

This ties into the discussion directly below. If we don't show displayname/avatar in the timeline at all before a user joins (but only their mxid), then that eliminates this problem.

> }

Reviewer: I think this is the same problem invites face actually, so I'm minded not to fix it in this MSC.

```

After a knock is received in a room it is expected to be displayed in the timeline, similar to other
membership changes. It is recommended to not display the reason until the user interacts with the
client in some way (e.g. clicking on a "show reason" button), as else this would basically allow

> outsiders to send messages into the room. Clients can optionally add a way for users of a room to

Author: Maybe instead of just "show reason" but "new knock from <mxid>, show details"?

> outsiders to send messages into the room. Clients can optionally add a way for users of a room to

Reviewer: Yeah, that could work.

You could also just take the approach of leaving it up to the implementation, which may think of a better solution :)

review all current knocks. After a knock in a room, a member of the room can invite the knocker.

To be able to implement this properly two new endpoints need to be added, one in the client-server
API and one in the server-server API.

> ## Restrictions

Reviewer 2: bear in mind that we can't change the [auth rules](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v1#authorization-rules) without introducing a new room version, since otherwise we get into the situation where some servers will accept events which should be rejected, and we'll get into a split-brain situation.

Author: Ah, didn't know that. Does there happen to be another room version in discussion anyways?

Reviewer 2: there's always another room version in discussion. Best way is to implement the MSC in a temporary/test/experimental room version [like this](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/49d3bca37b91fa092e13fd28c42dcf970fb86bb7/synapse/api/room_versions.py#L105) so that it can be tested etc. Then at some point someone will propose a proper room version to include the MSCs which have landed since the last one.

There are restrictions to being able to set this membership.

### Current membership
Only users without a current membership or with their current membership being "leave" can knock a
room. This means that a user that is banned or currently in the room can't knock on it.

### Join Rules
The `join_rule` of `m.room.join_rules` must be set to "invite". This means that people can't knock
in public rooms. Additionally the new join rule "private" is introduced. This is so that people can,
when creating a new room, prevent anyone from knocking.

### Power levels

> The default power level for "knock" is the default power level for the room. If a user has a too low

Reviewer 2: what do you mean by "the default power level for the room"?

Author: ![Screenshot_2020-02-13_18-48-03](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2433620/74463000-67fbc880-4e91-11ea-854a-1bcb0790ab90.png)

All these "Default", is that not how it is called?

Reviewer 2: I don't know offhand how riot maps those onto values in the `m.room.power_levels` event: it would be helpful to describe this at the protocol level.

power level to knock they aren't allowed to do this. As power levels can be set for users not currently
in the room this can be used as a way to limit who can knock and who can't.

#### Example:
`@alice:example.org` CAN knock, but `@bob:example.org` can't: The (incomplete) content of
`m.room.power_levels` is as follows:
```json
{
  "users": {
    "@alice:example.org": 1
  },
  "users_default": 0,
  "knock": 1
}
```

## Membership changes
Once someone has sent the `knock` membership into the room a change to the following memberships is
possible:
 - `invite`: The knock was accepted by someone inside the room and they are inviting the knocker into

>    the room.

Reviewer 6: I wonder if we should make it so that the user auto joins, e.g. one of:

1. have the knocker's HS immediately do a join after receiving invite,
2. allow the federation invite API return a signed join instead, or
3. some other mechanism

Author: 🤔 that might be a good idea, but could maybe also lead to unexpected behaviour? Not quite sure. Is autojoining a room a thing in the spec yet?

Reviewer 6: I don't think we have anything like this currently over federation. We do have thing where servers will auto join new local users to a room

Reviewer: I've left this down to an implementation detail for now, seeing as it's currently not something we're able to realistically mandate in the spec.

A note has been left in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403/commits/24f61c283cd39f5466e8908955bc3dcf99d9bb31.

| eventId | string | Required. The event ID for the knock event.

The JSON body is expected to be the full event.

Response Format:

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-----------|------|-------------|
| <body> | [integer, Empty Object] |

A request could look as follows:
```
PUT /_matrix/federation/v1/send_knock/%21abc123%3Amatrix.org/%24abc123%3Aexample.org HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "sender": "@someone:example.org",
  "origin": "matrix.org",
  "origin_server_ts": 1234567890,
  "type": "m.room.member",
  "state_key": "@someone:example.org",
  "content": {
    "membership": "knock",
    "displayname": "Alice",
    "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/avatar",
    "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"
  }
}
```

#### Response:
##### Status code 200:
The event was successfully accepted into the graph by the receiving homeserver.
```json
[
  200,
  {}
]
```

# Potential issues
This new feature would allow users to spam rooms that they don't partake in. That is why this proposal
adds both the new join rule and the new power level, in order to allow room admins to mitigate such
potential spam.

# Alternatives

> As for the join rule "invite", instead the join rule "knock" could be introduced, meaning the room

Reviewer 2: I like this: it means that semantics for existing rooms can be left unchanged whilst allowing new rooms to adopt the new semantics that allow knocking.

Author: What about dropping the join rules from this MSC at all in favour of the PL control?

Reviewer 2: see https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403#discussion_r379003104: I think I prefer the use of join rules to control this than power levels.

Author: As you mentioned that adding knock would need a new room version anyways due to auth rules then it simply couldn't be introduced in current rooms [without them upgrading], correct? If so, soru would probably also prefer to introduce "knock" rather than "private"

Reviewer 2: correct

is like "invite" only that people can also knock. The difference is for existing rooms: With this
proposal people can knock in existing "invite" rooms, with the alternative suggestion they can't.

> The two endpoints for the client-server API seem redundant, this MSC followed how JOIN is working

Reviewer 2: my instinct is that we could get away without speccing `/rooms/{roomId}/knock` ?

Author: Yeah, but then there would be an inconsistency with invite, and soru thought consistency was more important

Reviewer 2: I assume you mean `join` ?

understood; personally I'd prefer not to repeat the mistakes of /join, but it's subjective.

Author: Ah yes, sorry :+1:

Reviewer: This was additionally mentioned in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403#discussion_r520283202. I went with the decision of just having one endpoint, with the assumption that we may combine the other redundant endpoints in the future.

currently: One "proper" endpoint (`/rooms/{roomId}/join`) and one to work properly over federation
(`/join/{roomIdOrAlias}`). They could both be merged into one, however, as that would also affect
the join endpoint it seems out-of-scope for this MSC.

> # Security considerations

Reviewer 7: You need to explicitly state that we've considered knock spam and mitigations against it. We allude to using banning as a solution but this section is there for you to spell it out.

Also, can you transition from knock -> knock? Can you rescind your own knock?

Author: Soru thought that you cannot transition from knock->knock and you cannot rescind your own knock, to prevent spam: If you can do knock->knock then you can just flood a room without knows, if you can rescind knocks, you can just knock->rescind->knock->rescind and thus still flood a room.

> None. This doesn't allow users access to a room in any way.

Reviewer 6: We might want to consider being able to "silently" reject knocks, i.e. don't proactively send the `/leave` to the knocking server? Mainly as an anti abuse mechanism so that you can clear the room UI without having to let the other side know you interacted with them.

Author: The problem with that is that different servers then potentially have different views of a room - to what other problems will that lead down the road?

Reviewer 6: I don't think the servers in the room would have a different view, just the user wouldn't be sent the knock rejection.

OTOH I think this is a nice to have, rather than something that should block the MSC

Author: You could reject knocks with a ban, too, and the preson couldn't knock again

Reviewer 6: Yeah, maybe that is good enough for now

timeline, similar to other membership changes. It is recommended to not
display the reason until the user interacts with the client in some way (e.g.
clicking on a "show reason" button), as else this would essentially allow
outsiders to send messages into the room. Clients can optionally add a way
for users of a room to review all current knocks. After a knock in a room, a
member of the room can invite the knocker.

To be able to implement this properly, two new endpoints need to be added:
one in the Client-Server API and one in the Server-Server API.

## Restrictions
There are restrictions to being able to set this membership.

### Current membership
Only users without a current membership or with their current membership
being "leave" can knock on a room. This means that a user that is banned, has
already knocked or is currently in the room cannot knock on it.

### Join Rules
This proposal introduces a new possible value for `join_rule` in
`m.room.join_rules`: "knock". The value of `join_rule` in `m.room.join_rules`
must be set to "knock" for a knock to succeed. This means that existing rooms
will need to opt into allowing knocks in their room. rooms. Other than

> allowing knocks, "knock" is no different from the "invite" join rule.

Author: > rather than push rules?

You mean rather than power levels? xP

Anyhow, coming back to this after the few month pause the join_rules seems the cleaner way: we can still disallow certain people to knock by banning them. The only situation you can't do with join rules rather than PLs is that, by default, noone may knock and then you whitelist who is allowed to walk. This can be helpful for private communities with e.g. venting rooms where people sometimes have to leave due to a triggering topic being present and then they can knock to come back in......so yeah, still not entirely sure which approach is better.

> allowing knocks, "knock" is no different from the "invite" join rule.

Reviewer: > You mean rather than power levels? xP

lol yes, seems I've been hearing too much about the notifications project recently :P 

As for your mentioned use-case, perhaps that could be solved by an evolution of the moderation tools. Say banning via whitelist/blacklist?

> allowing knocks, "knock" is no different from the "invite" join rule.

Author: > As for your mentioned use-case, perhaps that could be solved by an evolution of the moderation tools. Say banning via whitelist/blacklist?

Yes, that could work and is out-of-scope for this MSC.

Just to toss ideas around: If we have permission roles, rather than power levels (similar to how discord does it), kicking, knocking, join rules etc. could all be handled by just one on and the same permission system.

> allowing knocks, "knock" is no different from the "invite" join rule.

Author: So to conclude: Using join rules seems sufficient for now

> allowing knocks, "knock" is no different from the "invite" join rule.

Reviewer: > Just to toss ideas around: If we have permission roles, rather than power levels (similar to how discord does it), kicking, knocking, join rules etc. could all be handled by just one on and the same permission system.

This is something we want to do eventually, yes. It's just going to be a *very large project*.

## Membership changes
Once someone has sent a `knock` membership into the room, the membership for
that user can be transitioned to the following possible states:
 - `invite`: In this case, the knock was accepted by someone inside the room
   and they are inviting the knocker into the room.
 - `leave`: In this case, similar to how kicks are handled, the knock has
   been rejected.
 - `ban`: In this case, the knock was rejected and the user has been prevented
   from sending further knocks.

Users are not allowed to change their membership once set to `knock`, in
order to prevent users from being able to knock multiple times and spam a
room.

XXX: So if you knock on a room that's then abandoned that's in your `/sync`
forever? Clients should have a way to tell their server to hide and show

> knocks.

Author: Rooms in general accumulate, so this shouldn't be much an issue?

> knocks.

Reviewer: Yes, though at least the client can leave those rooms if they want.

If a user knocks on a room, and the admin of that room disappears, the user is stuck with that knock for the rest of time.

> knocks.

Reviewer 2: yeah this sounds wrong. Users should be able to un-knock if they knock by accident. If you've got a problem user, just ban them.

> knocks.

Reviewer: Yeah, after thinking about it we still have the problem of a homeserver admin being able to send knocks from hundreds of users. Our response to that is to ban (ACL) the server, so there's no reason that we should implement a different defense mechanism here if it only leads to added complexity.

> knocks.

Author: And if a person annoyingly knocks again and again then they can be banned...which means that the transition `knock` --> `leave` actually does make somewhat sense?

> knocks.

Author: Oh, and knock reasons have to be redactable, in case they are non-nice texts, e.g. nsfw

> knocks.

Reviewer: @richvdh Should we "leave it up to implementation" in how homeservers deal with trying to rescind a knock to a room with no active homeservers? I don't think we specify anything in the spec in regards to stuck invites either...

other membership types, the parameters "displayname" and "avatar_url" are
optional. This membership can be set from users who aren't currently in said
room. An example for the membership would look like the following:
```json
{
  "membership": "knock",
  "displayname": "Alice",
  "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/avatar",
  "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"
}
```

After a knock in a room, a member of the room can invite the knocker.

## Restrictions
There are restrictions to being able to set this membership.

### Current membership
Only users without a current membership or with their current membership
being "leave" can knock on a room. This means that a user that is banned, has
already knocked or is currently in the room cannot knock on it.

### Join Rules
This proposal introduces a new possible value for `join_rule` in
`m.room.join_rules`: "knock". The value of `join_rule` in `m.room.join_rules`
must be set to "knock" for a knock to succeed. This means that existing rooms
will need to opt into allowing knocks in their rooms. Other than allowing
knocks, "knock" is no different from the "invite" join rule.

> As we're updating the join rules, and thus the auth rules, this proposal will

Reviewer 2: I'd like to see an explicit proposal for how the auth rules will be changed.

various membership states regarding the user.

It is proposed to add a fourth possible key to `rooms`, called `knock`. Its
value is a mapping from room ID to room information. The room information is
a mapping from a key `knock_state` to another mapping with key `events` being
a list of `StrippedStateEvent`. `StrippedStateEvent`s are defined as state
events that only contain the `sender`, `type`, `state_key` and `content`
keys. This behaviour matches `invite_events` which already exists to provide
information to the client their current room invites.

These stripped state events contain information about the room, most notably
the room's name and avatar. A client will need this information to show a
nice representation of pending knocked rooms. Only `m.room.name`,
`m.room.avatar`, `m.room.join_rules` and `m.room.membership` state events
should be included here, rather than all room state event types.
Additionally, only `m.room.membership` events of the knocking user should be
included.

This prevents unneeded state from the room leaking out, and also speeds
things up (think not sending over hundreds of membership events from big
rooms).

> XXX: Is `m.room.canonical_alias` worth allowing here for any reason?

Reviewer 2: can we just make this the same as the state sent for invite events?

Reviewer: Yes, and that is defined as:

> An optional list of simplified events to help the receiver of the invite identify the room. The recommended events to include are the join rules, canonical alias, avatar, and name of the room.

I'll just put in the same.

              },
              "sender": "@room_admin:example.com",
              "state_key": "",
              "type": "m.room.name"
            },
            {
              "content": {
                "url": "mxc://example.com/xyz54321"
              },
              "sender": "@room_admin:example.com",
              "state_key": "",
              "type": "m.room.avatar"
            },
            {
              "content": {
                "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/abc1234",
                "displayname": "Knocking User",
                "membership": "knock"
              },
              "sender": "@knocking_user:example.org",
              "state_key": "@knocking_user:example.org",
              "type": "m.room.member",
            }
          ]
        }
      }
    }
  },
  ...
}
```

Once a knock has been made, a user in the room can decide whether they want
to accept or deny the knock. If they accept, they will invite the knocker,
which the knocker will be notified about through existing flows.

If they deny, then a leave membership event is sent in the room, and the
knocking user will be notified through existing flows (matching the behaviour

> of when an invite is recinded).

Reviewer 2: this seems a bit out of place in the "extensions to sync" section?

Reviewer: It became duplicated information after fleshing out the "Membership changes" section.

TODO: Federation passing certain needed state events from the server that has
the room to the server that's knocking. Can we filter the events sent over so
that we can avoid the security issue with invites that we found earlier? (And

> then backport this filter to invites? :)

Reviewer 2: I don't really understand this paragraph.

Reviewer: Whoops, those weren't meant to be checked in.

Submits a signed knock event to the resident server for it to accept into the
room's graph. Note that event format may differ between room versions.

Request format:

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-----------|------|-------------|
| Path parameters:
| roomId | string | Required. The room ID that should receive the knock.
| eventId | string | Required. The event ID for the knock event.

The JSON body is expected to be the full event.

Response Format:

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-----------|------|-------------|
| `knock_room_state` | [StrippedStateEvent] | Required. State events providing public room metadata

A request could look as follows:
```json
PUT /_matrix/federation/v1/send_knock/%21abc123%3Amatrix.org/%24abc123%3Aexample.org HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "sender": "@someone:example.org",
  "origin": "matrix.org",
  "origin_server_ts": 1234567890,
  "type": "m.room.member",
  "state_key": "@someone:example.org",
  "content": {
    "membership": "knock",
    "displayname": "Alice",
    "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/avatar",
    "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"
  }
}
```

#### Response:
##### Status code 200:

> The event was successfully accepted into the graph by the receiving

Reviewer 2: which server is responsible for sending the knock event to the rest of the servers in the room? The resident server, presumably?

Reviewer: Yes, I should state that explicitly.

homeserver. The response contains `StrippedStateEvent`s with room metadata
(room name, avatar ...) that the knocking homeserver can pass to the client.
The event types that can be sent here should match those of the `/sync`
extensions mentioned above.

> This is loosely based off of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is loosely based on the
```

### Join Rules
This proposal makes use of the existing "knock" join rule. The value of
`join_rule` in the content of the `m.room.join_rules` state event for a room
must be set to "knock" for a knock to succeed. This means that existing rooms
will need to opt into allowing knocks in their rooms. Other than allowing
knocks, a join rule of "knock" is functionally equivalent to that of
"invite", except that it additionally allows external users to change their
membership to "knock" under certain conditions.

As the join rules are modified, the auth rules are as well. The [current auth
rules](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v6#authorization-rules-for-events) are defined
by each room version. To change these rules, the implementation of this
proposal must be done in a new room version. The explicit changes to the auth
rules from room version 5 are:

* Under "5. If type is `m.room.member`", the following will be added:

  ```
  a. If `membership` is `knock`:
    i. If the `join_rule` is anything other than `knock`, reject.
    ii. If `sender` does not match `state_key`, reject.
    iii. If the `sender`'s membership is not `ban`, `knock` or `join`, allow.

>     iv. Otherwise, reject.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what to do about transitioning from `invite` -> `knock`. I'm tempted to allow it as I don't see any inherent harm by doing so.

Reviewer 4: I would argue that invite -> knock is invalid - the client should be smart enough to do invite -> join

Reviewer: I was wondering if there were any valid edge cases for invite -> knock... But I can't really think of any, and clients can just reject the invite and then knock again if they *really* feel they need to.

Reviewer: Changed in 7dcff8f2.

simple abuse vectors that can be accomplished by individual users. For
instance, when a knock occurs, clients are advised to hide the reason until
the user interacts with the client in some way (e.g. clicking on a "show
reason" button). The user should reveal the reason only if they choose to.

It is recommended to not display the reason by default as else this would
essentially allow outsiders to send messages into the room.

It is still theoretically possible for a homeserver admin to create many users
with different user IDs or display names, all spelling out an abusive
message, and then having each of them knock in order. 

Another abuse vector is allowed by the ability for users to rescind knocks.
This is to help users in case they knocked on a room accidentally, or simply
no longer want to join a room they've knocked on. While this is a useful
feature, it also allows users to spam a room by knocking and rescinding their
knocks over and over. Particularly note-worthy is that this will generate
state events that homeserver in the room will need to process. And while
join/leave state changes will do the same in a public room, the act of

> knocking is much lighter than the act of joining a room.

Reviewer: @turt2live @michaelkaye @Sorunome @clokep One potential solution for solving this is to *not* allow rescinding a knock from a room, but *do allow* for knocks to be rescinded locally. Thus when a client chose to rescind a knock, the client's homeserver would not attempt to send the `leave` into the room, but just inform the user that they no longer have a knock in that room. The state for that user in the room is still `knock` though. This would allow a user to only ever send one state event into the room while their knock is pending.

After locally rescinding the knock, if the user's knock is accepted then it just appears as a normal invite into the room. If rejected, the leave event will appear down /sync, but otherwise nothing will change.

I think this is a good compromise between good client UX and limiting abusive room behaviour. What do you think?

Reviewer 4: Locally rescinding the knock feels like a way to encourage a fork of the room, or be left with stuck knocks. I'm not sure how important of an issue it is to solve here and now - I think we might need a more federated rate limit structure that somehow prevents looping behaviour like this.

Reviewer: @turt2live That's a good point, locally rejecting invites is really only used as an implementation bandaid due to homeservers that fail to respond, so we probably shouldn't codify that behaviour into the spec...

> a more federated rate limit structure that somehow prevents looping behaviour like this.

This sounds ideal, and it's true that this problem isn't limited to knocks. There are lots of things you can do when you have unlimited users/servers.

Reviewer 8: What about making rescinded knocks self-imposed bans?

Reviewer: That would prevent someone from knocking on the same room again e.g if they accidentally cancelled the knock.

You're also currently unable to ban yourself from a room :)

Using the moderation tools (bans, Server ACLs) we have today is currently the best way to solve potential abuse by knocking.

Reviewer 8: @anoadragon453 self-ban with room block semantics is proposed as part of #3007.

```json
{
  "membership": "knock",
  "displayname": "Alice",
  "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/avatar",
  "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"
}
```

After a knock in a room, a member of the room can invite the knocker, or they
can decide to reject it instead.

## Restrictions
There are restrictions to being able to set this membership, as well as
accepting or denying the knock.

### Current membership
Only users without a current membership or with their current membership
being "leave" can knock on a room. This means that a user that is banned, has
already knocked or is currently in the room cannot knock on it.

### Join Rules
This proposal introduces a new possible value for `join_rule` in
`m.room.join_rules`: "knock". The value of `join_rule` in `m.room.join_rules`
must be set to "knock" for a knock to succeed. This means that existing rooms
will need to opt into allowing knocks in their rooms. Other than allowing
knocks, "knock" is no different from the "invite" join rule.

As the join rules are modified, the auth rules are as well. The [current auth
rules](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v1#authorization-rules) are defined

> by each room version. To change these rules, the implementation of this

Reviewer: Indeed... I've linked to v6 for now. While it is fairly simple to follow the chain of auth rules throughout room versions now, I dread to think what would happen if we didn't have a linear upgrade path through room versions.

proposal must be done in a new room version. The explicit changes to the auth
rules from room version 5 are:

* Under "5. If type is `m.room.member`", the following should be added:

  ```
  a. If `membership` is `knock`:
    i. If the `join_rule` is anything other than `knock`, reject.
    ii. If `sender` does not match `state_key`, reject.
    iii. If the `sender`'s membership is not `ban` or `join`, allow.
    iv. Otherwise, reject.
  ```

  Note that:
    - The `sender` field in the event is set to the user ID of the knocking
      user, not any other user in the room that belongs to a homeserver that
      the knocking user is using to inject into the room DAG. This is separate
      from an invite membership event, where the `sender` is the inviter and
      the `state_key` is the invitee.
    - a.ii is justified as one user should not be able to knock on behalf of
      another user.
    - a.iii is justified as knocks should not be allowed if the knocking user
      has been banned from the room, or if they are already in the room.
    - Knocks are not restricted by power level like invites are. The `join_rules`

>       are already used to enforce whether someone can or cannot knock.

Reviewer: Correct. I try to explain this in the "Membership changes" section, but do you think I should mention that here at all?

It requires invite permissions to accept, and kick permissions to reject.

>       are already used to enforce whether someone can or cannot knock.

Reviewer 4: just a pointer would be appreciated - it hasn't been discussed in the MSC by this point in reading, so the reader is making assumptions. Just a "Approving/declining the knock is still subject to permissions, however, and are discussed later in this proposal" would be fine.

  
Additionally, note that redactions of knock events are not a concern, as
`membership` keys are excluded from being redacted as defined by all current
room versions.

## Membership changes
Once someone has sent a `knock` membership into the room, the membership for
that user can be transitioned to the following possible states:
 - `invite`: In this case, the knock was accepted by someone inside the room
   and they are inviting the knocker into the room.
 - `leave`: In this case, similar to how kicks are handled, the knock has

>    been rejected. Alternatively, the knocking user has rescinded their knock.

Reviewer 9: I don't really see much discussion of rescinding knocks except in the "Security considerations" section. How would a user rescind their knock? Is this the same as rejecting invites?

   from sending further knocks.

Let's talk about each one of these in more detail.

### Membership change to `invite`

The knock has been accepted by someone in the room.

The user who is accepting the knock must have the power level to perform
invites. The user's homeserver will then send an invite - over federation if
necessary - to the knocking user. The knocking user may then join the room as
if they had been invited normally.

The accept a knock, the client should call [`POST
/_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/invite`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#post-matrix-client-r0-rooms-roomid-invite)
with the user ID of the knocking user in the JSON body.

If the knocking user is on another homeserver, then the homeserver of the
accepting user will call [`PUT
/_matrix/federation/v2/invite/{roomId}/{eventId}`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.4#put-matrix-federation-v2-invite-roomid-eventid)
on the knocking homeserver to inform it that the knock has been accepted.

The knocking homeserver should assume an invite to a room it has knocked on means
that its knock has been accepted, even if the invite was not explicitly

> related to the knock attempt.

Reviewer: I think lands squarely in the ballpark of implementation detail, I've made a note mentioning this in 24f61c28.

### Membership change to `leave`

The knock has been rejected by someone in the room.

XXX: There is also an open question here about who should be able to reject a
knock. When revoking an invite for a user, perhaps counter-intuitively, you
need to have a high enough power level to kick users, rather than invite
them. You also need to have a higher power level than them. Should the same
be done for knocking, assuming the knocking user has the default power level?

> Or should it be the same power level that's required to accept the knock?

Reviewer 2: +1. Particularly if we're using the /kick endpoint to implement it. 

(I think a case could be made that the sender of an invite should be allowed to retract it, in case of a mistake. I see no equivalent here.)

To reject a knock, the client should call [`POST
/_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/kick`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#post-matrix-client-r0-rooms-roomid-kick)
with the user ID of the knocking user in the JSON body.

At this point, if the knocking user is on another homeserver, then the
homeserver of the rejecting user needs to send the `leave` event over
federation to the knocking homeserver. However, this is a bit tricky as it is
currently very difficult to have events from a room propagate over federation
if the receiving homeserver is not in the room. This is due to the remote
homeserver being unable to verify that the event being sent is actually from
a homeserver in the room - and that the homeserver in the room had the
required power level to send it. This is a problem that currently affects
other similar operations, such as disinviting or unbanning a federated user.
In both cases, they won't be notified as their homeserver is not in the room.

While we could send easily send the leave event as part of a generic
transaction to the remote homeserver, that homeserver would have no way to

> validate the `prev_events` and `auth_events` that the event references. We

Reviewer 2: it really doesn't. the remote server gets the kick and *only* the kick - it isn't allowed to request any other events to help it build up an auth graph.

> validate the `prev_events` and `auth_events` that the event references. We

Reviewer 4: not sure I understand tbh - the kicked server should be able to pull history from a remote server for the section of DAG it was a member of, up to and including the kick event. If the kick event references future events then that would be a problem?

> validate the `prev_events` and `auth_events` that the event references. We

Reviewer 2: > the kicked server should be able to pull history from a remote server for the section of DAG it was a member of

the problem is that the kicked server has *never* been a member of the room.

> validate the `prev_events` and `auth_events` that the event references. We

Reviewer: We had [a discussion](https://matrix.to/#/!XaqDhxuTIlvldquJaV:matrix.org/$ONbVOVgeEJrffOv24yUGJEAPu2jbulFLNRTKRUohsFY?via=matrix.org&via=vector.modular.im&via=envs.net) about this in #synapse-dev.

While this is a something that we'll need to solve, the underlying problem itself is quite complex. We've decided to not block this MSC on a solution for it.

could send those events over as well, but those will also reference other
events that require validation and so on.

A dumb thing we could easily do here is to trust the leave event implicitly
if it is sent by the homeserver we originally knocked through. We know this
homeserver is (or at least was) in the room, so they're probably telling the
truth. This is almost an edge case though, as while you'll knock through one
homeserver in the room, there's no guarantee that the admin that denies your
knock will be on the same homeserver you knocked through. Perhaps the
homeserver you knocked through could listen for this and then send the event

> back to you - but what if it goes offline in the meantime?

Reviewer 2: we should, but we don't need to block this feature on it.

> back to you - but what if it goes offline in the meantime?

Reviewer 4: not sure I agree tbh - it feels like an important part of this feature to reliably have declines shipped over federation. Without the fix, we end up risking possibly not solving the problem at all. 

I'd be happier if this MSC at least linked to another MSC which outlines a solution we can take a look at.

> back to you - but what if it goes offline in the meantime?

Reviewer: Resolving this thread on the conclusion at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403/files#r579391876.

/_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/knock` endpoint.

### Extensions to `GET /_matrix/client/r0/sync`

In [the response to
`/sync`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#get-matrix-client-r0-sync)
is a `rooms` field. This is a dictionary which currently contains keys
`join`, `invite` and `leave`, which each provide information to the client on
various membership states regarding the user.

It is proposed to add a fourth possible key to `rooms`, called `knock`. Its
value is a mapping from room ID to room information. The room information is
a mapping from a key `knock_state` to another mapping with key `events` being
a list of `StrippedStateEvent`. `StrippedStateEvent`s are defined as state
events that only contain the `sender`, `type`, `state_key` and `content`
keys.

These stripped state events contain information about the room, most notably
the room's name and avatar. A client will need this information to show a
nice representation of pending knocked rooms. The recommended events to
include are the join rules, canonical alias, avatar, and name of the room,
rather than all room state. This behaviour matches the information sent to

> remote homeservers when invited their users to a room.

Reviewer: Synapse will send the encryption state during invites by default: https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/c059413001cd2ff7c6104cfcd323ed115245ae90/docs/sample_config.yaml#L1395

But yes, the spec for invites currently lacks this recommendation: https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.4#put-matrix-federation-v2-invite-roomid-eventid

> remote homeservers when invited their users to a room.

Reviewer: I've added the recommendation for encryption into this MSC.

| userId | string | Required. The user ID the knock event will be for.
| Query Parameters:
| ver | [string] | The room versions the sending server has support for. Defaults to `[1]`.

Response Format:

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-----------|------|-------------|
| room_version | string | The version of the room where the server is trying to knock.
| event | Event Template | An unsigned template event. May differ between room versions.

#### Responses
##### Status code 200:
Returns a template to be used to knock on rooms. May depend on room version.
```json
{
  "room_version": "2",
  "event": {
    "type": "m.room.member",
    "room_id": "!somewhere:example.org",
    "content": {
      "membership": "knock"
    },
    "state_key": "@someone:example.org",
    "origin": "example.org",
    "origin_server_ts": 1549041175876,
    "sender": "@someone:example.org"
  }
}
```

##### Status code 400:
This request was invalid, e.g. bad JSON. Example reply:
```json
{
  "errcode": "M_INCOMPATIBLE_ROOM_VERSION",
  "error": "Your homeserver does not support the features required to join this room",
  "room_version": "3"
}
```

> ### `PUT /_matrix/federation/v1/send_knock/{roomId}/{eventId}`

Reviewer 9: Not to get into a weird versioning debate, but I wonder if this should be `v2` since the response format matches the v2 of `send_join` and `send_leave`.

Reviewer: I think this makes sense, and we currently don't require endpoints to start at `v1`. The relevant proposal also does not require this: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2475

I'll bump it up, thanks!

mentioned above.

This is loosely based on the
[federated invite](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.4#put-matrix-federation-v2-invite-roomid-eventid)
request content.
```json
{
  "knock_room_state": [
    {
      "content": {
        "join_rule": "knock"
      },
      "sender": "@room_admin:example.com",
      "state_key": "",
      "type": "m.room.join_rules"
    },
    {
      "content": {
        "name": "Some cool room"
      },
      "sender": "@room_admin:example.com",
      "state_key": "",
      "type": "m.room.name"
    },
    {
      "content": {
        "url": "mxc://example.com/xyz54321"
      },
      "sender": "@room_admin:example.com",
      "state_key": "",
      "type": "m.room.avatar"
    },
    {
      "content": {
        "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/abc1234",
        "displayname": "Knocking User",
        "membership": "knock"
      },
      "sender": "@knocking_user:example.org",
      "state_key": "@knocking_user:example.org",
      "type": "m.room.member",
    }
  ]
}
```

# Potential issues
This new feature would allow users to send events into rooms that they don't

> partake in. That is why this proposal adds a new join rule, in order to allow
> room admins to opt in to this behaviour.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
partake in. That is why this proposal enables the `knock` join rule, in order to allow
room admins to opt in to this behaviour.
```

timeline, similar to other membership changes. Clients can optionally add a way
for users of a room to review all current knocks.

# Security considerations
Clients must take care when implementing this feature in order to prevent
simple abuse vectors that can be accomplished by individual users. For
instance, when a knock occurs, clients are advised to hide the reason until
the user interacts with the client in some way (e.g. clicking on a "show
reason" button). The user should reveal the reason only if they choose to.

It is recommended to not display the reason by default as else this would
essentially allow outsiders to send messages into the room.

It is still theoretically possible for a homeserver admin to create many users
with different user IDs or display names, all spelling out an abusive
message, and then having each of them knock in order. 

Another abuse vector is allowed by the ability for users to rescind knocks.
This is to help users in case they knocked on a room accidentally, or simply
no longer want to join a room they've knocked on. While this is a useful
feature, it also allows users to spam a room by knocking and rescinding their

> knocks over and over.

Reviewer 4: it's worth mentioning that this attack is easier with knocks than it is with join/leave cycles, as joining often takes effort while knocking doesn't. Similarly, it's not really possible to invite yourself over and over and instead requires cooperative effort.

There's not much incentive to avoid hammering (un)knocks into a room under this proposal.

Reviewer: This is a good point, though I wonder if one day joins will be light enough such that the difference is negligible. (I hope so, but for different reasons :).

I've added a line mentioning this.

In both cases, room admins should employ typical abuse mitigation tools, such
as user bans and server ACLs. Clients are encouraged to ease employing these
tools easy even if the offensive user or server is present not in the room.

# Unstable prefix

An unstable feature flag is added to the `unstable_features` dict of
`/_matrix/client/versions` with the key `xyz.amorgan.knock` and value `true`.
If this key is present, this is a signal to clients that the homeserver has

> experimental support for room knocking.

Reviewer 4: Not needed if you also use a custom room version under the capabilities API.

The new endpoints should contain an unstable prefix during experimental
implementation. The unstable counterpart for each endpoint is:

C-S knock method 1:

* `POST /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/knock`
* `POST /_matrix/client/unstable/xyz.amorgan/rooms/{roomId}/knock`

C-S knock method 2:

* `POST /_matrix/client/knock/{roomIdOrAlias}`
* `POST /_matrix/client/unstable/xyz.amorgan/knock/{roomIdOrAlias}`

S-S make_knock:

* `GET /_matrix/federation/v1/make_knock/{roomId}/{userId}`
* `GET /_matrix/federation/unstable/xyz.amorgan/make_knock/{roomId}/{userId}`

S-S send_knock:

* `PUT /_matrix/federation/v1/send_knock/{roomId}/{eventId}`
* `PUT /_matrix/federation/unstable/xyz.amorgan/send_knock/{roomId}/{eventId}`

And finally, an unstable prefix is added to the key that comes down `/sync`,

> the new join rule for rooms and the `content.membership` key of the member

Reviewer 4: not a new join rule

already knocked or is currently in the room cannot knock on it.

### Join Rules
This proposal makes use of the existing "knock" join rule. The value of
`join_rule` in the content of the `m.room.join_rules` state event for a room
must be set to "knock" for a knock to succeed. This means that existing rooms
will need to opt into allowing knocks in their rooms. Other than allowing
knocks, a join rule of "knock" is functionally equivalent to that of
"invite", except that it additionally allows external users to change their
membership to "knock" under certain conditions.

As the join rules are modified, the auth rules are as well. The [current auth
rules](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v6#authorization-rules-for-events) are defined
by each room version. To change these rules, the implementation of this
proposal must be done in a new room version. The explicit changes to the auth
rules from room version 5 are:

* Under "5. If type is `m.room.member`", the following will be added:

  ```
  a. If `membership` is `knock`:
    i. If the `join_rule` is anything other than `knock`, reject.
    ii. If `sender` does not match `state_key`, reject.

>     iii. If the `sender`'s membership is not `ban`, `knock`, `invite` or `join`, allow.
>     iv. Otherwise, reject.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
    iii. If the `sender`'s membership is not `ban`, `knock` or `join`, allow.
    iv. If the `sender`'s membership is `invite`, allow and resolve the membership status as `join`.
    v. Otherwise, reject.
```
Suggested change enables an user that knocks a room to join, from a server that has not received the invite that has already been sent from another server.

Reviewer 10: > resolve the membership status as `join`

I don't think that's a thing

Reviewer 11: I don't see why the user's homeserver can't simply try to join as normal in such a scenario.

Reviewer 8: > why ... n't simply try to join as normal

Because in this case, we want to resolve the combination of an unresponded invite and an unresponded knock as a forcible member add.

Reviewer: That should be down to the homeserver to either:

* Attempt to join the room if a user knocks when they're already invited to a room, or
* Reject the knock and inform the client that they're already invited, and should attempt a join instead.

Getting the behaviour you're after doesn't need to be determined by the event auth rules.

Reviewer 8: > Getting the behaviour you're after doesn't need to be determined by the event auth rules.

As a principle, all events that cause a user join a room should be initiated by some client, not by the server on its own. This is the reason that I add it to the event auth rules, where servers can overrule or reject the event rather than inserting an event in between.

Reviewer: With the current auth event rules, if a server attempts to insert a `knock` membership into a room that they are already invited to, that will be rejected by all servers.

It's up to the implementation whether it wants to send a `join` membership into the room upon receiving a knock for a room where the knocking user is already invited.

Broadly I'm not sure what this change to the event auth rules accomplishes that a check on the Client-Server API implementation of a homeserver couldn't do already.

Reviewer 8: Homeserver of the knocking user or homeserver of the inviter can indeed do that, but there are possibilities that those two unresponded requests meet in yet another server, and I want to retain tne client-initiated nature of invite, knock, and join, with a very intuitive conflict resolution.

Reviewer: I believe I see what you're saying. If a homeserver decides to send a knock on behalf of a user after they've already been invited, then other homeservers should treat that as a join.

Unfortunately, it's not possible for an event to be changed while processing it in regards to the auth rules. The event content is signed by the homeserver that created it, and cannot be modified unless the new content is resigned by the original homeserver.

We could just go ahead and insert the `knock` state event into the DAG and instruct homeservers that "if a user has a knock membership, and at some point in the past had an invite, then they are join". However, implementing that would be a radical change to the current idea of only needing to look at the current state in a room to get the full picture. It would also likely be an inefficient calculation for homeservers to constantly make.

I'm OK with saying that homeservers should transform a knock attempt into a join attempt if an invite exists in the given room, *if they'd like to*, before sending that out to other homeservers. You may get homeservers that do this, and others that don't. If you want this behaviour, use one that does.

Reviewer 4: This feels like a server-side bug if it can't handle the error of invite -> knock meaning invite -> join. The server could retry on behalf of the user to resolve the conflict.

Reviewer: Indeed, this is a server implementation issue rather than something that should be resolved in the spec event authorisation.

  ```

  Note that:
    - The `sender` field in the event is set to the user ID of the knocking
      user, not any other user in the room that belongs to a homeserver that
      the knocking user is using to inject into the room DAG. This is separate
      from an invite membership event, where the `sender` is the inviter and
      the `state_key` is the invitee.
    - a.ii is justified as one user should not be able to knock on behalf of
      another user.

>     - a.iii is justified as knocks should not be allowed if the knocking user
>       has been banned from the room, has already knocked on the room, is
>       invited to the room or if they are already in the room.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
    - a.iii is justified as knocks should not be allowed if the knocking user
      has been banned from the room, has already knocked on the room, 
      or if they are already in the room.
```

Reviewer: The answer above applies here as well.

# MSC2403: Add "knock" feature
Many people are in invite-only rooms. Sometimes, someone wants to join such a
room and can't, as they aren't invited. This proposal adds a feature for a

> user to indicate that they want to join a room.

Reviewer 12: Looks fine in general, my main concern with this is that right now spaces are almost here which will allow people in a space to join rooms in that space without having to knock or ask for an invite. This seems like the main driver for this feature, and it certainly introduces a lot of extra potential security / spam vectors so I wonder if the remaining benefit outweighs the cost.

Reviewer: That's a good point and certainly one of the main drivers. Another usecase is having a room (or a Spacec!) that is publicly known, but those in the room/Space want to validate a potential outsider before allowing them in, without needing to find and invite them first.

This could support situations where a student requests to join a school organisation or signs up for a planned event.

Reviewer 12: True, it's interesting and quite nice that it would work for spaces equally.

# Proposal
This proposal implements the reserved "knock" membership type for the

> `m.room.member` state event. This state event indicates that when a user

Reviewer 13: How much does knocking need to be a state event? I understand we have a reserved membership value for that but what if we make it an EDU instead? I wouldn't expect knocks to be long-lived (a user knocking and getting allowed in a month - is it even a case?), and it would nicely alleviate an issue of altering the room state of the room without joining the room (which, to me, feels rather counter-intuitive). Implications are that repeated knocks become a thing, so it would be good to impose some lengthy cool-down period after knocking (say, 1 day for a server to keep a knock event around while rejecting repeated knocks from the same user). Just an idea to mull over.

Reviewer: This is something I didn't think about, and is actually a pretty cool idea. I worry about the usability and technical implications however.

Remember that EDUs are not tied to a room, but rather to a user. So a knocking user will first need to find someone in the room to send an EDU to. That user's homeserver may receive the EDU, and will then need to rebroadcast it to everyone in the room - which there isn't really precedence for yet. Additionally, if a new admin/mod is appointed, and the others relinquish control of the room to them, they won't know about the knock.

The solution for that last bit is to have the outsider knock again in order to re-distribute EDUs. This is where my concerns about usability come in. It's true that in most cases knocks will likely accepted rather quickly - but sometimes you get inactive admins. They may not come back and accept the knock until a week later, and the idea of myself - totally personal UX opinion - is that clicking the knock button each day in the hopes to alert the admin a bit annoying. I don't know whether I'm just being ignored or if the EDU got lost somewhere.

That all said, besides the state benefit, using EDUs does have the benefit of only certain users can view the knock attempt, rather than the whole room, which may be useful in some use cases. Though on the other side of the coin, history of when someone knocked can also be useful, which state events provide.

It's an interesting idea, and possibly the basis of some new state event-like data type that's tied to rooms, but that doesn't end up in the room history.

Reviewer 8: A reasonable middle ground could be having the knock itself as EDU, but accept, reject and rescind of kick as state events.

Reviewer: For clarity, accepting a knock is an invite, rejecting a knock is a kick, and rescinding a kick doesn't translate to a specific state event. I wrote the above rebuttal under the assumption that knock would be an EDU, and the other actions would remind their respective state events.

Reviewer: @KitsuneRal do you think the above is fair? I'm not ruling it out as a possible solution for a new iteration, but I think with what we have available in Matrix today it makes more sense to keep it as a state event for now.

Reviewer: > The question here is whether we want (read: whether potential users need) a knock to be only slightly heavier than, say, a presence notification - or rather that knocks be auditable permanent records of attempts to gain entry to the room. Do you have any idea? I don't find it in the MSC.

That's a good way to phrase it. I think it is useful to have knock history for auditability purposes. Being able to figure out whether a user joined via a straight invite or via a knock originally can be useful categories when designing features/bots. I don't think that's a question that's been asked before, and a conclusion for that in the MSC would be really beneficial.

> I think that if we allow state changes from outside that basically changes the security model under which we were designing things so far - that nothing can change the room state from "outside" of it (both in terms of interacting user and a homeserver), and joining has been a single point of interaction to change an "outside" user (and homeserver) status to "inside". By adding a knock as a state we're adding another point of interaction (in terms of API, quite literally) that needs extra protection.

You're right that it allows people outside the room to change a limited subset of the room state, just as a join does. One can no longer assume a user's membership state is immutable unless they are in the room or are performing a join. But I don't think the current model should limit us to extend it to another entry point. Fundamentally these state changes depend on the event auth rules and current state of the room. One can still disable knocking, just as they do public joins, by augmenting that state.

From the implementation side of EDUs, I'm a bit worried about needing to manage the edge cases when we step outside of using room state. For instance, device updates and key sharing work this way and we've had many implementation bugs with the edge cases.

Reviewer 13: The ephemeral nature of EDUs and (historically) a limited number of use cases for them does make them more prone to breakage and harder to debug, I admit. That said, if we go with the current state event way, I'd really prefer to not give an excuse to knocking just for the sake of getting something in return (see my comment on `knock_state`).

knocks on a room, they are asking for permission to join. Like all membership
events, it contains an optional "reason" parameter to specify the reason you
want to join. Like other membership types, the parameters "displayname" and
"avatar_url" are optional. This membership can be set from users who aren't
currently in said room. An example for the membership would look like the
following:
```json
{
  "membership": "knock",
  "displayname": "Alice",
  "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/avatar",
  "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"
}
```

After a knock in a room, a member of the room can invite the knocker, or they

> can decide to reject it instead.

Reviewer: Good point, I hadn't considered push notifications. Being able to trigger a push based on whether a user can accept the knock (invite) would be useful, though I'm not sure whether we have any conditions for the notification target's power level yet? https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#actions

Having it on by default is a topic of debate. It sounds useful if we can only notify those who can act on it.

Unfortunately `sender_notification_permission` doesn't help us here as it's only concerned about the power levels of the sender of the event (i.e the knocking user).

> can decide to reject it instead.

Reviewer 12: Ok - deciding to leave it for a separate MSC is perfectly fine I think, but better to explicitly decide to do so than forget about it.

> can decide to reject it instead.

Reviewer: Agreed. Added a note to the MSC in eda65847.

  "world_readable": true
}
```

Therefore this proposal adds `join_rule` as a new, required field to a
`PublicRoomsChunk`. The `join_rule` of knockable rooms will be `knock`, thus
giving clients the information they need to attempt entry of
a room when a client selects it. It also allows clients to display
knockable rooms differently than publicly joinable ones.

For backwards compatibility with old servers, if a client does not find a
`join_rule` key in a chunk, then it should assume a `join_rule` key with
value `public`.

## Server-Server API
Similarly to join and leave over federation, a ping-pong game with two new
endpoints is introduced: `make_knock` and `send_knock`. Both endpoints must
be protected via server ACLs.

### `GET /_matrix/federation/v1/make_knock/{roomId}/{userId}`

Asks the receiving server to return information that the sending server will
need to prepare a knock event.

Request format:

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-----------|------|-------------|
| Path parameters:
| roomId | string | Required. The room ID that should receive the knock.
| userId | string | Required. The user ID the knock event will be for.
| Query Parameters:

> | ver | [string] | The room versions the sending server has support for. Defaults to `[1]`.

Reviewer 14: Why not make this required?  It's optional in `make_join` for backwards compatibility, but we don't need to worry about backwards compatibility for this endpoint.  Also, defaulting to `[1]` doesn't make much sense because room version 1 doesn't support knocking.

Reviewer: Oh! I wasn't aware of the backwards compatibility requirement for `make_join`. In that case yes, let's make this required.

And you're right, it indeed doesn't make sense to default to a room version that doesn't include knocking :)

Reviewer: Done in 84008775.

Response Format:

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-----------|------|-------------|
| room_version | string | The version of the room where the server is trying to knock.
| event | Event Template | An unsigned template event. May differ between room versions.

#### Responses
##### Status code 200:
Returns a template to be used to knock on rooms. May depend on room version.
```json
{
  "room_version": "2",
  "event": {
    "type": "m.room.member",
    "room_id": "!somewhere:example.org",
    "content": {
      "membership": "knock"
    },
    "state_key": "@someone:example.org",
    "origin": "example.org",
    "origin_server_ts": 1549041175876,
    "sender": "@someone:example.org"
  }
}
```

##### Status code 400:
This request was invalid, e.g. bad JSON. Example reply:
```json
{
  "errcode": "M_INCOMPATIBLE_ROOM_VERSION",
  "error": "Your homeserver does not support the features required to join this room",
  "room_version": "3"
}
```

> 

Reviewer 14: Should it return 404 if it doesn't know about the room, like `make_join`?

Reviewer: Yes, there's no reason it shouldn't. Done in 337c87b9.

> ### `PUT /_matrix/federation/v2/send_knock/{roomId}/{eventId}`

Reviewer 4: why is this v2 when the make_knock is v1?

Reviewer: This is `/v2` as a result of an earlier conversation: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403#discussion_r527103623

The idea was that it matches the response body of `/v2/send_join` and `/v2/send_leave`.

If we were going by [MSC2475](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2475) rules it takes exception to starting at `/v1` for "sweeping changes", which may or may not include new endpoints aligning with old.

I'm happy to go either way on this though.

Reviewer 4: the endpoint versioning mechanics are largely defined under [MSC2844](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2844) which is to say "no change". MSC2475 is likely to be closed as irrelevant under MSC2844.

The mechanics are roughly:
* Start at v1 unless something drastic happened to say otherwise (see: identity server spec where we'd want to start at v2 to indicate auth for historical reasons)
  * An argument could be made for either using v1 or v2 in this MSC under this condition.
* When the endpoint changes format or needs a new version, increment it.

I would argue that we should be symmetrical for `make/send_*` endpoints, which means either deciding on v1 or v2 depending on whether or not "different PDU format" feels like a reason to not use v1. Personally, I do not hold an opinion beyond them being symmetrical.

Reviewer: I'm happy with following [MSC2844](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2844) and starting at v1. I don't think this qualifies as a sweeping change. The context of `/send_knock` being v1 and thus making `/make_knock` v2 a bit confusing is a perfectly reasonable argument against doing so, MSC2844 or not.

I'll to it v1.

Reviewer: Done in 248a3da5.

      "state_key": "",
      "type": "m.room.avatar"
    },
    {
      "content": {
        "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/abc1234",
        "displayname": "Knocking User",
        "membership": "knock"
      },
      "sender": "@knocking_user:example.org",
      "state_key": "@knocking_user:example.org",
      "type": "m.room.member",
    }
  ]
}
```

# Potential issues
This new feature would allow users to send events into rooms that they don't
partake in. That is why this proposal enables the a `knock` join rule, in
order to allow room admins to opt in to this behaviour.

# Alternatives
The two endpoints for the Client-Server API seem redundant, this MSC followed
how JOIN is working currently: One "proper" endpoint (`/rooms/{roomId}/join`)
and one to work properly over federation (`/join/{roomIdOrAlias}`). They
could both be merged into one, however, as that would also affect the join
endpoint it seems out-of-scope for this MSC.

# Client UX recommendations
After a knock is received in a room, it is expected to be displayed in the
timeline, similar to other membership changes. Clients can optionally add a way
for users of a room to review all current knocks.

> 

Reviewer 12: I think we'd probably need to add something here about the importance of clients displaying some kind of information to help users spot attackers impersonating another user by stealing their display name & avatar then knocking on rooms: knocking makes this a *really* easy attack vector. IMO it's critical that the client display e2e verification status / how many rooms you already share with the knocker, or at the very least the mxid, and flag a huge warning if anything looks amiss. That in itself is a challenge to balance between false positives and false negatives.

Reviewer: Considering one can easily set their displayname and avatar to anything when sending a membership event, we'll indeed need to show the user's MXID in the client. E2EE verification status would be useful as well. I believe this can be handled with existing endpoints in the spec, but I'll make a note that clients should be aware of this here.

Reviewer: Added in 876c5624.

the user interacts with the client in some way (e.g. clicking on a "show
reason" button). The user should reveal the reason only if they choose to.

It is recommended to not display the reason by default as else this would
essentially allow outsiders to send messages into the room.

It is still theoretically possible for a homeserver admin to create many users
with different user IDs or display names, all spelling out an abusive
message, and then having each of them knock in order. 

Another abuse vector is allowed by the ability for users to rescind knocks.
This is to help users in case they knocked on a room accidentally, or simply
no longer want to join a room they've knocked on. While this is a useful
feature, it also allows users to spam a room by knocking and rescinding their
knocks over and over. Particularly note-worthy is that this will generate
state events that homeservers in the room will need to process. And while
join/leave state changes will do the same in a public room, the act of
knocking is much lighter than the act of joining a room.

In both cases, room admins should employ typical abuse mitigation tools, such

> as user bans and server ACLs. Clients are encouraged to ease employing these

Reviewer 14: "... ease employing these tools easy ..."  I think intended to say either "... ease employing these tools ..." or "... make employing these tools easy ..."

```suggestion
as user bans and server ACLs. Clients are encouraged to make employing these
```

> tools easy even if the offensive user or server is not present in the room.

Reviewer: @KitsuneRal @uhoreg and I talked out of band about the abuse potential of external users knocking on a room. 

@KitsuneRal offered [a fundamental change](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403/files#r573180627) which would eliminate this issue, but carries other trade-offs.

The system as described allows abuse by sending lots of unwarranted state events in a room. This is not a new problem however. The same can occur when one creates a public room, and someone joins lots and lots of accounts to that room, thus resulting in a ballooning of room state. The solution - if room bans and server ACLs are not enough - is for the room admin to switch the room to invite-only until the attack subsides or the attacker gets bored.

The same is the case for knocking. If someone is attacking your room by sending lots of knocks, then switching the room to invite-only will block the attack. Knocking can then be turned back on at a later date.

@uhoreg mentioned that a fundamental problem we have today in matrix is that state in a room cannot be removed or collapsed, which can lead to large state graphs, and in some implementations performance woes. This is true, and something that we'll need to solve as matrix rooms grow and more homeservers spring up (and p2p matrix brings with it many more users).

This *is* something we'll need to solve, but I don't think this particular MSC will be the one to do that.

Reviewer 8: > uhoreg mentioned that a fundamental problem we have today in matrix is that state in a room cannot be removed or collapsed, which can lead to large state graphs, and in some implementations performance woes. This is true, and something that we'll need to solve as matrix rooms grow and more homeservers spring up (and p2p matrix brings with it many more users).

This is essentially unsolvable without allowing server instances to arbitrarily censor events.

Reviewer: I'm talking about the resource-usage implications of storing old, redundant state (lots of leaves, joins, leaves, joins) resulting in a large, slow to traverse DAG. The problem isn't accepting lots of new events, but dealing with long tails of state. I don't think censoring (rejecting?) events solves that problem.

# Unstable prefix

An unstable feature flag is not required due to this proposal's requirement

> of a new room version. Clients can check for a room version that includes

Reviewer 14: Is there an experimental room version that is being used?

Reviewer: Yep, didn't realise that wasn't quite noted here. Explicitly added in 74f3b12a.

# MSC2403: Add "knock" feature
Many people are in invite-only rooms. Sometimes, someone wants to join such a
room and can't, as they aren't invited. This proposal adds a feature for a
user to indicate that they want to join a room.

# Proposal
This proposal implements the reserved "knock" membership type for the
`m.room.member` state event. This state event indicates that when a user
knocks on a room, they are asking for permission to join. Like all membership
events, it contains an optional "reason" parameter to specify the reason you
want to join. Like other membership types, the parameters "displayname" and

> "avatar_url" are optional. This membership can be set from users who aren't
> currently in said room. An example for the membership would look like the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
"avatar_url" are optional. This membership can be sent by users who aren't
currently in said room. An example for the membership would look like the
```

following:
```json
{
  "membership": "knock",
  "displayname": "Alice",
  "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/avatar",
  "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"
}
```

After a knock in a room, a member of the room can invite the knocker, or they
can decide to reject it instead.

## Restrictions
There are restrictions to being able to set this membership, as well as

> accepting or denying the knock.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
accepting or denying the knock.  A formal description of the changes to the auth rules is given below; 
first we summarise the semantics of the proposed changes.
```

### Current membership
Only users without a current membership or with their current membership
being "leave" can knock on a room. This means that a user that is banned, has
already knocked or is currently in the room cannot knock on it.

### Join Rules
This proposal makes use of the existing "knock" join rule. The value of
`join_rule` in the content of the `m.room.join_rules` state event for a room
must be set to "knock" for a knock to succeed. This means that existing rooms
will need to opt into allowing knocks in their rooms. Other than allowing
knocks, a join rule of "knock" is functionally equivalent to that of
"invite", except that it additionally allows external users to change their
membership to "knock" under certain conditions.

> As the join rules are modified, the auth rules are as well. The [current auth
> rules](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v6#authorization-rules-for-events) are defined
> by each room version. To change these rules, the implementation of this
> proposal must be done in a new room version. The explicit changes to the auth
> rules from room version 5 are:

Reviewer 2: This reads confusingly - the changes to the semantics of the join rules are inherently implemented via changes to the auth rules: they aren't separate things.

```suggestion

### Auth rules

Each room version defines the auth rules which should be applied in that room version.
This MSC proposes a new room version with the following changes to the [auth
rules from room version 6](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v6#authorization-rules-for-events):
```

> * Under "5. If type is `m.room.member`", the following will be added:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Under "5. If type is `m.room.member`", insert the following after "e. If membership is `ban`":
```

  ```

>   a. If `membership` is `knock`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  f. If `membership` is `knock`:
```

    i. If the `join_rule` is anything other than `knock`, reject.
    ii. If `sender` does not match `state_key`, reject.

>     iii. If the `sender`'s membership is not `ban`, `knock`, `invite` or `join`, allow.

Reviewer 2: we don't allow knock->knock? I think allowing it is less likely to confuse the state res algorithm, unless you have good reasons to forbid it.

Reviewer: I think it was originally prevented as there wasn't really any good reason for it. But thinking about it now, it'd be nice to update your pending knocks when you change your display name.

Given one can instead just rescind and knock again, there isn't really any good reason to forbid it.

Reviewer: Note to self, change L70 as well.

    iv. Otherwise, reject.
  ```

>   Note that:

Reviewer 2: I don't think making this part of the list item helps readability.

```suggestion
Note that:
```

>     - The `sender` field in the event is set to the user ID of the knocking
>       user, not any other user in the room that belongs to a homeserver that
>       the knocking user is using to inject into the room DAG. This is separate
>       from an invite membership event, where the `sender` is the inviter and
>       the `state_key` is the invitee.

Reviewer 2: The "not any other user" phrase is more confusing than helpful.

```suggestion
    - Both the `sender` and `state_key` fields are set to the user ID of the knocking
      user. This is different to an `invite` membership event, where the `sender` is the inviter and
      the `state_key` is the invitee.
```

>     - a.ii is justified as one user should not be able to knock on behalf of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - f.ii is justified as one user should not be able to knock on behalf of
```

      another user.

>     - a.iii is justified as knocks should not be allowed if the knocking user

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - f.iii is justified as knocks should not be allowed if the knocking user
```

      invited to the room or if they are already in the room.
    - Knocks are not restricted by power level like invites are. The `join_rules`
      are already used to enforce whether someone can or cannot knock. However,
      power level rules do apply when approving or denying the knock, as discussed
      in the Membership Changes section below.

Additionally, note that redactions of knock events are not a concern, as
`membership` keys are excluded from being redacted as defined by all current
room versions.

## Membership changes
Once someone has sent a `knock` membership into the room, the membership for
that user can be transitioned to the following possible states:
 - `invite`: In this case, the knock was accepted by someone inside the room
   and they are inviting the knocker into the room.
 - `leave`: In this case, similar to how kicks are handled, the knock has
   been rejected. Alternatively, the knocking user has rescinded their knock.
 - `ban`: In this case, the knock was rejected and the user has been prevented
   from sending further knocks.

Let's talk about each one of these in more detail.

> ### Membership change to `invite`

Reviewer 2: it might be worth adding a section here for the initial change to `knock`: what are the C-S and S-S APIs involved?

Reviewer 2: I guess an alternative way of expressing this is: it feels odd to read through the MSC and realise that we've got to "how to transition *out* of `knock`" before seeing "how we transition *into* `knock`". It might be worth putting the docs for the new APIs higher up in the doc: there's a bit of a causality fail right now.

Reviewer: Agreed. I've moved them up near the top of the doc, which does seem a bit more sensible, at least to me.

The knock has been accepted by someone in the room.

The user who is accepting the knock must have the power level to perform

> invites. The user's homeserver will then send an invite - over federation if

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
invites. The accepting user's homeserver will then send an invite - over federation if
```

necessary - to the knocking user. The knocking user may then join the room as
if they had been invited normally.

The accept a knock, the client should call [`POST
/_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/invite`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#post-matrix-client-r0-rooms-roomid-invite)
with the user ID of the knocking user in the JSON body.

If the knocking user is on another homeserver, then the homeserver of the
accepting user will call [`PUT
/_matrix/federation/v2/invite/{roomId}/{eventId}`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.4#put-matrix-federation-v2-invite-roomid-eventid)
on the knocking homeserver to inform it that the knock has been accepted.

The knocking homeserver should assume an invite to a room it has knocked on means
that its knock has been accepted, even if the invite was not explicitly
related to the knock attempt.

Note that client or homeserver implementations are free to automatically
accept this invite given they're aware that it's the result of a previous

> knock.

Reviewer 2: :thinking: I wonder what happens if both try to accept the invite... there might be a race? I suspect the client will get an error which it might need to handle?

Reviewer: By "both" are you referring to the homeserver and the client automatically accepting the invite?

Ideally the homeserver would try to accept the invite before sending it down to the client, I suppose.

Reviewer 2: > By "both" are you referring to the homeserver and the client automatically accepting the invite?

yes.

> Ideally the homeserver would try to accept the invite before sending it down to the client, I suppose.

well ok, but accepting invites isn't instant... I guess it could withhold the invite from the client until the join completes (or fails). Which leads me to... what happens when the join fails?

Reviewer: This seems to be slipping into implementation territory (though perhaps we could solve things by speccing a way for the client to ask the server to automatically accept invites on its behalf).

I suppose at that point the server would pass the invite down to the client, who would then try itself, and if that fails the client will either continue trying (in which case it's bad client code) or would present the error to the user and ask to manually intervene, similar to how users deal with stuck invites today. Ideally joins would just work though.

Reviewer: Added a note to this effect in 68d2d7cf.

### Membership change to `leave`

The knock has been rejected by someone in the room, or the knocking user has

> rescinded their knock.

Reviewer 2: it might be clearer to split the two cases into separate sections: they are somewhat different.

To rescind a knock, the knocking user's client must call [`POST

> /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/leave`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#post-matrix-client-r0-rooms-roomid-leave).

Reviewer 2: ... presumably the server does a send_leave over federation if necessary?

Reviewer: That's implied, but I should probably specify that here indeed.

with the user ID of the knocking user in the JSON body. Rejecting a knock
over federation has a slight catch, however.

When the knocking user is on another homeserver, the homeserver of the
rejecting user needs to send the `leave` event over federation to the
knocking homeserver. However, this is a bit tricky as it is currently very
difficult to have events from a room propagate over federation when the
receiving homeserver is not in the room. This is due to the remote homeserver
being unable to verify that the event being sent is actually from a
homeserver in the room - and that the homeserver in the room had the required
power level to send it. This is a problem that currently affects other,
similar operations, such as disinviting or unbanning a federated user. In
both cases, they won't be notified as their homeserver is not in the room.

While we could send easily send the leave event as part of a generic
transaction to the remote homeserver, that homeserver would have no way to
validate the `prev_events` and `auth_events` that the event references. We
could send those events over as well, but those will also reference other
events that require validation and so on.

> A dumb thing we could easily do here is to trust the leave event implicitly

Reviewer 2: https://developers.google.com/style/inclusive-documentation#ableist-language

```suggestion
A simple thing we could easily do here is to trust the leave event implicitly
```

### Membership change to `ban`

The knock has been rejected by someone in the room and the user has been
banned, and is unable to send further knocks.

This one is fairly straightforward. Someone with the appropriate power levels
in the room bans the user. This will have the same effect as rejecting the
knock, and in addition prevent any further knocks by this user from being
allowed into the room.

If the user is unbanned, they will be able to send a new knock which could be
accepted.

To ban the user, the client should call [`POST
/_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/ban`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#post-matrix-client-r0-rooms-roomid-ban) with the user ID of the knocking user in the JSON body.

Informing the knocking user about the update is the same as rejecting the
knock.

## Client-Server API
A new endpoint is introduced in the Client-Server API: `POST
/_matrix/client/r0/knock/{roomIdOrAlias}`. This allows the client to state
their intent to knock on a room.

Additionally, extensions to the `GET /_matrix/client/r0/sync` endpoint are
introduced. These allow a client to receive information about the status of
their knock attempt.

> The newly proposed endpoint requires authentication and can be rate limited.

Reviewer 2: put this under the section for the endpoint in question?

> ### `POST /_matrix/client/r0/knock/{roomIdOrAlias}`

Reviewer 2: link to https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#post-matrix-client-r0-join-roomidoralias for comparison?

The path parameter (`roomIdOrAlias`) is either the room ID or the alias of
the room you want to knock on. Additionally several `server_name` parameters
can be specified via the query parameters. The post body accepts an optional
string parameter, `reason`, which is the reason you want to join the room. A
request could look as follows:

```json
POST /_matrix/client/r0/knock/%23foxes%3Amatrix.org?server_name=matrix.org&server_name=elsewhere.ca  HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"
}
```

#### Responses:
##### Status code 200:
The user knocked successfully. Example reply:
```json
{}

> ```

Reviewer 2: should we not return the room id?

Reviewer: Oh yes, I think this might've been a copy/paste error from the `/join/!room_id` endpoint which was later discarded.

            {
              "content": {
                "join_rule": "knock"
              },
              "sender": "@room_admin:example.com",
              "state_key": "",
              "type": "m.room.join_rules"
            },
            {
              "content": {
                "name": "Some cool room"
              },
              "sender": "@room_admin:example.com",
              "state_key": "",
              "type": "m.room.name"
            },
            {
              "content": {
                "url": "mxc://example.com/xyz54321"
              },
              "sender": "@room_admin:example.com",
              "state_key": "",
              "type": "m.room.avatar"
            },
            {
              "content": {
                "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/abc1234",
                "displayname": "Knocking User",
                "membership": "knock"
              },
              "sender": "@knocking_user:example.org",
              "state_key": "@knocking_user:example.org",
              "type": "m.room.member",
            }
          ]
        }
      }
    }
  },
  ...
}
```

### Changes regarding the Public Rooms Directory

> A problem arises for discovery of knockable rooms. Ideally one wouldn't have

Reviewer 2: needs a link to https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#get-matrix-client-r0-publicrooms for context.

request content.
```json
{
  "knock_room_state": [
    {
      "content": {
        "join_rule": "knock"
      },
      "sender": "@room_admin:example.com",
      "state_key": "",
      "type": "m.room.join_rules"
    },
    {
      "content": {
        "name": "Some cool room"
      },
      "sender": "@room_admin:example.com",
      "state_key": "",
      "type": "m.room.name"
    },
    {
      "content": {
        "url": "mxc://example.com/xyz54321"
      },
      "sender": "@room_admin:example.com",
      "state_key": "",
      "type": "m.room.avatar"
    },
    {
      "content": {
        "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/abc1234",
        "displayname": "Knocking User",
        "membership": "knock"
      },
      "sender": "@knocking_user:example.org",
      "state_key": "@knocking_user:example.org",
      "type": "m.room.member",
    }
  ]
}
```

# Potential issues
This new feature would allow users to send events into rooms that they don't
partake in. That is why this proposal enables the a `knock` join rule, in
order to allow room admins to opt in to this behaviour.

# Alternatives

> The two endpoints for the Client-Server API seem redundant, this MSC followed

Reviewer 2: I only see one endpoint proposed, so this is presumably outdated.

feature, it also allows users to spam a room by knocking and rescinding their
knocks over and over. Particularly note-worthy is that this will generate
state events that homeservers in the room will need to process. And while
join/leave state changes will do the same in a public room, the act of
knocking is much lighter than the act of joining a room.

In both cases, room admins should employ typical abuse mitigation tools, such
as user bans and server ACLs. Clients are encouraged to make employing these
tools easy even if the offensive user or server is not present in the room.

# Unstable prefix

An unstable feature flag is not required due to this proposal's requirement
of a new room version. Clients can check for a room version that includes
knocking via the Client-Server API's [capabilities
endpoint](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#get-matrix-client-r0-capabilities).
Experimental implementation should use `xyz.amorgan.knock` as a room version identifier.

The new endpoints should contain an unstable prefix during experimental
implementation. The unstable counterpart for each endpoint is:

C-S knock method 1:

* `POST /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/knock`

> * `POST /_matrix/client/unstable/xyz.amorgan/rooms/{roomId}/knock`

Reviewer 2: outdated?

In [the response to
`/sync`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#get-matrix-client-r0-sync)
is a `rooms` field. This is a dictionary which currently contains keys
`join`, `invite` and `leave`, which each provide information to the client on
various membership states regarding the user.

It is proposed to add a fourth possible key to `rooms`, called `knock`. Its
value is a mapping from room ID to room information. The room information is
a mapping from a key `knock_state` to another mapping with key `events` being
a list of `StrippedStateEvent`. `StrippedStateEvent`s are defined as state
events that only contain the `sender`, `type`, `state_key` and `content`
keys.

Note that while `join` and `leave` keys in `/sync` use `state`, we use
`knock_state` here. This mirrors `invite`s use of `invite_state`.

These stripped state events contain information about the room, most notably
the room's name and avatar. A client will need this information to show a
nice representation of pending knocked rooms. The recommended events to
include are the join rules, canonical alias, avatar, name and encryption
state of the room, rather than all room state. This behaviour matches the

> information sent to remote homeservers when invited their users to a room.

Reviewer 15: e.g.?

> information sent to remote homeservers when invited their users to a room.

Reviewer 13: I mean that the room directory is an example of where one could find the information on the room. Actually, I even suggest that such information be found in the room directory, rather than shared in `knock_state`, in order to make the "knocked" state as close as possible in terms of information availability to the "leave" state (since the level of trust to members in both states is the same).

> information sent to remote homeservers when invited their users to a room.

Reviewer: You're right that it exposes some state from the room. The state it exposes is up to the homeserver implementation, but the recommendation is clear.

The reason we choose to expose this information is to help clients with displaying a list of pending knocks. Without this state, that list would just be a list of room IDs. With the state, the list can be made up of room names, avatars and aliases.

We could ask clients to try and retrieve this information from the public room directory instead (although it's not clear whether they should use their local homeserver's directory, or some remote one). However I don't like tying the presentation of a room in a pending knock list with the public room directory for a couple reasons:

1. The room you are knocking on may not be in the public room directory, thus only some rooms you knock on you will see avatar/name information for. (Granted not all rooms will have an avatar or name to begin with).

2. Homeservers can choose to withhold public room information from remote users.

Perhaps instead of it being up to whatever homeserver implementation external users are invited/knock through, we could instead define a state event which determines what state event types are sent to external users?

> information sent to remote homeservers when invited their users to a room.

Reviewer 13: I guess that would solve some issues concerning "unfederated" interaction with rooms, yes. Worth a separate MSC.

which allows us to explore a list of rooms we may be able to join.

The spec does not prevent us from adding rooms with 'knock' join_rules to the
public rooms directory. However, a user attempting
to join a room in the directory will not know whether to directly attempt a
join, or to knock first. The current content of a `PublicRoomsChunk` does not
contain this information:

```json
{
  "aliases": [
    "#murrays:cheese.bar"
  ],
  "avatar_url": "mxc://bleeker.street/CHEDDARandBRIE",
  "guest_can_join": false,
  "name": "CHEESE",
  "num_joined_members": 37,
  "room_id": "!ol19s:bleecker.street",
  "topic": "Tasty tasty cheese",
  "world_readable": true
}
```

Therefore this proposal adds `join_rule` as a new, required field to a
`PublicRoomsChunk`. The `join_rule` of knockable rooms will be `knock`, thus
giving clients the information they need to attempt entry of
a room when a client selects it. It also allows clients to display
knockable rooms differently than publicly joinable ones.

For backwards compatibility with old servers, if a client does not find a
`join_rule` key in a chunk, then it should assume a `join_rule` key with

> value `public`.

Reviewer: Hmm, I see what you're saying. Similar, but subtly different. Shouldn't require any change in the implementation really though. Sounds fine to me.

being "leave" can knock on a room. This means that a user that is banned, has
already knocked or is currently in the room cannot knock on it.

### Join Rules
This proposal makes use of the existing "knock" join rule. The value of
`join_rule` in the content of the `m.room.join_rules` state event for a room
must be set to "knock" for a knock to succeed. This means that existing rooms
will need to opt into allowing knocks in their rooms. Other than allowing
knocks, a join rule of "knock" is functionally equivalent to that of
"invite", except that it additionally allows external users to change their
membership to "knock" under certain conditions.

### Auth rules

Each room version defines the auth rules which should be applied in that room version.
This MSC proposes a new room version with the following changes to the [auth
rules from room version 6](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v6#authorization-rules-for-events):

* Under "5. If type is `m.room.member`", insert the following after "e. If membership is `ban`":

  ```
  f. If `membership` is `knock`:
    i. If the `join_rule` is anything other than `knock`, reject.
    ii. If `sender` does not match `state_key`, reject.

>     iii. If the `sender`'s membership is not `ban`, `invite` or `join`, allow.

Reviewer 13: That doesn't seem aligned with the earlier words in "Current membership". Either here, or "Current membership" should be updated.

>     i. If the `join_rule` is anything other than `knock`, reject.
>     ii. If `sender` does not match `state_key`, reject.
>     iii. If the `sender`'s membership is not `ban`, `invite` or `join`, allow.
>     iv. Otherwise, reject.

Reviewer 8: Really no harm accepting knocks to public rooms as the sender may not have received the change in the meantime.
```suggestion
    i. If the `join_rule` is anything other than `public` or `knock`, reject.
    ii. If `sender` does not match `state_key`, reject.
    iii. If the `sender`'s membership is not `ban`, `invite` or `join`, allow.
    iv. Otherwise, reject.
```

Reviewer: What do you mean by "the sender of the knock may not have received the change in the meantime".

Reviewer 8: The client's state may be behind the homeserver's and the room may become public in the meantime, whereas it was a knock-and-accept room before.

Reviewer: It'd be a bit confusing for room admins if people knocked on a room that was public. I don't think we should support that just for that highly unlikely edge case.

Reviewer 8: We cannot assume the latency is low enough, hence we need to account for that edge case.

Reviewer: By that logic we should allow anyone to ban anyone in case someone is set as an admin on the server and the client hasn't caught up yet.

Reviewer 8: No, that logic only applies in cases that *effective power increases*, such as from ban to unban, from "cannot do A" to "can do A".

Reviewer 8: That kind of logic will really only apply in cases *effective power of all affected users increase*.

Reviewer 13: I'd say there's really no harm in the client syncing its state in that edge case. The fewer events take part in auth rules, the better.

Reviewer 8: > I'd say there's really no harm in the client syncing its state in that edge case.

Then, every client will need to try at least twice to ensure a knock actually goes through. Which is a huge communication overhead.

Reviewer 13: Certainly not _every_ client and not with _every_ knock, given that it's an edge case.

Reviewer 15: allowing knocking on a public room would just increase the likelihood of knock spam. it only makes sense to knock on a door which is shut. the fact there might be a race with that room becoming public is irrelevant, imo.

discretion.

### Membership change to `leave` via rejecting a knock

The knock has been rejected by someone in the room.

To reject a knock, the rejecting user's client must call [`POST
/_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/kick`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#post-matrix-client-r0-rooms-roomid-kick)
with the user ID of the knocking user in the JSON body. Rejecting a knock
over federation has a slight catch, though.

When the knocking user is on another homeserver, the homeserver of the
rejecting user needs to send the `leave` event over federation to the
knocking homeserver. However, this is a bit tricky as it is currently very
difficult to have events from a room propagate over federation when the
receiving homeserver is not in the room. This is due to the remote homeserver
being unable to verify that the event being sent is actually from a
homeserver in the room - and that the homeserver in the room had the required
power level to send it. This is a problem that currently affects other,
similar operations, such as disinviting or unbanning a federated user. In
both cases, they won't be notified as their homeserver is not in the room.

> While we could send easily send the leave event as part of a generic

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
While we could easily send the leave event as part of a generic
```

To rescind a knock over federation, the knocking homeserver must complete
a [`make_leave`, `send_leave` dance](
https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.4#leaving-rooms-rejecting-invites)
with a homeserver in the room.

### Membership change to `ban`

The knock has been rejected by someone in the room and the user has been
banned, and is unable to send further knocks.

This one is fairly straightforward. Someone with the appropriate power levels
in the room bans the user. This will have the same effect as rejecting the
knock, and in addition prevent any further knocks by this user from being
allowed into the room.

If the user is unbanned, they will be able to send a new knock which could be
accepted.

To ban the user, the client should call [`POST
/_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/ban`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#post-matrix-client-r0-rooms-roomid-ban) with the user ID of the knocking user in the JSON body.

Informing the knocking user about the update is the same as rejecting the
knock.

# Potential issues
This new feature would allow users to send events into rooms that they don't

> partake in. That is why this proposal enables the a `knock` join rule, in

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
partake in. That is why this proposal enables the `knock` join rule, in
```

order to allow room admins to opt in to this behaviour.

# Alternatives
The possibility of initiating a knock by sending EDUs between users instead of sending 
a membership state event into a room has been raised. This is an ongoing discussion
occurring at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403/files#r573180627.

# Client UX recommendations
After a knock is received in a room, it is expected to be displayed in the
timeline, similar to other membership changes. Clients can optionally add a way

> for users of a room to review all current knocks.

Reviewer 13: How much is displaying knocks by default valuable for users that cannot invite?

Reviewer 15: it mirrors real life, and means that a non-privileged user in the room can go and get the attention of someone who can invite out-of-band to let the knocker in.

Reviewer 13: I really wouldn't mind that even in real life (by default, not always) knocking was heard to someone authorised to open the door. Matrix clients could be compared to butlers in that case. It's just a question of picking the defaults.

Reviewer 13: One concern here is that, unlike joins, knocks can be 1) legitimately repeated; 2) are prone to be abused to spam the room. If a knock attack comes, I'd rather give users of that room an opportunity to continue undisrupted discussion instead of seeing the timeline interspersed with numerous knocks; and leave tackling the attack (if anything, by switching `join_rule` to `invite`) to room admins.

Reviewer 16: Maybe make a note that clients should group multiple knocks by the same people together? e.g. "X has knocked Y times", to make it minimally disruptive, yet informative.

Reviewer: > Maybe make a note that clients could/should visually group multiple knocks by the same people together? e.g. "X has knocked Y times", to make it minimally disruptive, yet informative.

That's true, and clients should probably do so anyways. Though you'd still have timeline flooding if multiple users were carrying out the attack.

It's definitely a UX/design question. Only showing knocks in the timeline for admins would mitigate the disruption of (non-admin) conversation during an attack. However it would hide an otherwise convenient display of information for users.

It's probably best if I just dump these potential benefits/pitfalls into the MSC and clients can set up their UI as they think best.

Reviewer 13: I think it's worth stating these considerations in the MSC in order to include them in an implementation guide, rather than in the spec.

# MSC2403: Add "knock" feature
Many people are in invite-only rooms. Sometimes, someone wants to join such a
room and can't, as they aren't invited. This proposal adds a feature for a
user to indicate that they want to join a room.

# Proposal
This proposal implements the reserved "knock" membership type for the
`m.room.member` state event. This state event indicates that when a user
knocks on a room, they are asking for permission to join. Like all membership
events, it contains an optional "reason" parameter to specify the reason you
want to join. Like other membership types, the parameters "displayname" and
"avatar_url" are optional. This membership can be sent by users who aren't
currently in said room. An example for the membership would look like the
following:
```json
{
  "membership": "knock",
  "displayname": "Alice",
  "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/avatar",
  "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"
}
```

> After a knock in a room, a member of the room can invite the knocker, or they
> can decide to reject it instead.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
After a knock in a room, a member of the room can let the knocker in, or they
can decide to reject it instead.
```

Reviewer 4: this seems overly nitpicky, and without sign-off.

Response Format:

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-----------|------|-------------|
| `knock_room_state` | [StrippedStateEvent] | Required. State events providing public room metadata

A request could look as follows:
```json
PUT /_matrix/federation/v1/send_knock/%21abc123%3Amatrix.org/%24abc123%3Aexample.org HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "sender": "@someone:example.org",
  "origin": "matrix.org",
  "origin_server_ts": 1234567890,
  "type": "m.room.member",
  "state_key": "@someone:example.org",
  "content": {
    "membership": "knock",
    "displayname": "Alice",
    "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/avatar",
    "reason": "I want to join this room as I really love foxes!"
  }
}
```

#### Response:
##### Status code 200:
The event was successfully accepted into the graph by the homeserver that
received the knock. It must then send this knock into the room, before
responding to the knocking homeserver, indicating the knock succeeded.

The response contains `StrippedStateEvent`s with room metadata (room name,
avatar ...) that the knocking homeserver can pass to the client. The event
types that can be sent here should match those of the `/sync` extensions

> mentioned above.

Reviewer 4: like the invite state, there's no requirement to actually include those state events. It's helpful for aesthetic reasons, but this section of the MSC seems to be reminding readers what *could* be there to help them review the API format. It doesn't appear to be mandating that those state events be present.

      },
      "sender": "@room_admin:example.com",
      "state_key": "",
      "type": "m.room.avatar"
    },
    {
      "content": {
        "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/abc1234",
        "displayname": "Knocking User",
        "membership": "knock"
      },
      "sender": "@knocking_user:example.org",
      "state_key": "@knocking_user:example.org",
      "type": "m.room.member",
    }
  ]
}
```

##### Status code 403:
This request is forbidden, e.g. the user is banned from the room. Example reply:
```json
{
  "errcode": "M_FORBIDDEN",
  "error": "You are not allowed to knock on this room"
}
```

##### Status code 404:
The room is unknown to the remote server. Example reply:
```json
{
  "errcode": "M_NOT_FOUND",
  "error": "Unknown room"
}
```

## Restrictions
There are restrictions to being able to set this membership, as well as
accepting or denying the knock.  A formal description of the changes to the auth rules is given below; 
first we summarise the semantics of the proposed changes.

### Current membership
Only users without a current membership or with their current membership
set to "knock" or "leave" can knock on a room. This means that a user that

> is banned, is invited or is currently in the room cannot knock on it.

Reviewer 13: See https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403/files#diff-9dcacf9adb620c5346eba2f70f71bd50ed4f85a5e2844ac130e112165ce35c06R69

> is banned, is invited or is currently in the room cannot knock on it.

Reviewer 17: That is what I am referencing isn't it? It does say if they aren't allowed. My point is that

1. It would be nice to be explicit here. That section only mentions "(e.g. they are banned)".
2. It would be nice to provide better error messages for cases such as "you have already knocked" and "you are already in the room", if only to help implementers and buggy clients.

> is banned, is invited or is currently in the room cannot knock on it.

Reviewer: The message to include is up to the implementation, but yes the error should be `403`, `M_FORBIDDEN` if you are unable to join the room due to your currently membership state (ban, invite, join).

    iv. Otherwise, reject.
  ```

Note that:
    - Both the `sender` and `state_key` fields are set to the user ID of the knocking
      user. This is different to an `invite` membership event, where the `sender` is the inviter and
      the `state_key` is the invitee.
    - f.ii is justified as one user should not be able to knock on behalf of
      another user.
    - f.iii is justified as knocks should not be allowed if the knocking user
      has been banned from the room, is invited to the room or if they are already
      in the room.
    - Knocks are not restricted by power level like invites are. The `join_rules`
      are already used to enforce whether someone can or cannot knock. However,
      power level rules do apply when approving or denying the knock, as discussed
      in the Membership Changes section below.

Additionally, note that redactions of knock events are not a concern, as
`membership` keys are excluded from being redacted as defined by all current
room versions.

## Membership changes
Once someone has sent a `knock` membership into the room, the membership for
that user can be transitioned to the following possible states:

>  - `invite`: In this case, the knock was accepted by someone inside the room
>    and they are inviting the knocker into the room.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
 - `join`: In this case, the knock was accepted by someone inside the room.
```

### Membership change to `invite`

The knock has been accepted by someone in the room.

The user who is accepting the knock must have the power level to perform
invites. The accepting user's homeserver will then send an invite - over federation if
necessary - to the knocking user. The knocking user may then join the room as
if they had been invited normally.

To accept a knock, the client should call [`POST
/_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/invite`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#post-matrix-client-r0-rooms-roomid-invite)
with the user ID of the knocking user in the JSON body.

If the knocking user is on another homeserver, then the homeserver of the
accepting user will call [`PUT
/_matrix/federation/v2/invite/{roomId}/{eventId}`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.4#put-matrix-federation-v2-invite-roomid-eventid)
on the knocking homeserver to inform it that the knock has been accepted.

The knocking homeserver should assume an invite to a room it has knocked on means
that its knock has been accepted, even if the invite was not explicitly
related to the knock attempt.

Note that client or homeserver implementations are free to automatically

> accept this invite given they're aware that it's the result of a previous

Reviewer 17: Should we say that the homeserver **should** accept the invite?

Reviewer 4: That feels a bit invasive, even if it is the expected behaviour. I'd prefer it if we kept it as implementation-specific and revisit in another MSC later on.

knock. In case of failing to auto-accept an invite on the homeserver, it's
recommended for homeservers to pass the invite down to the client so that it
may try at a later point (or reject the potentially broken invite) at the user's

> discretion.

Reviewer 8: This dance can also be eliminated if we define the result of accepted knock as `join`, rather than invite.

Reviewer 13: Not without changing the shape of the federation API: as for now, a join should originate from the joining side, not from the receiving side. Unless I'm mistaking, you can only invite a user on an external homeserver, not force-join it (and that's actually a good thing because servers can't trust each other).

Reviewer 8: > as for now, a join should originate from the joining side

With my proposal, the join would still originate from the joining side as `knock` and the receiving side would merely "attest" it, i.e. if `join_rule` is  not `invite`, memberships state transistion of `knock` to `join` would be an allowed state transistion.

> Not without changing the shape of the federation API

You would take the signed knock as attestation, i.e. the knock-join endpoint would require supplying both the knock record and acceptance event.

Reviewer 13: That doesn't come from your suggested changes. Please elaborate how you propose to changes the API, in particular what you mean by that "entirely separate" knock-join endpoint, and the sequence of calls between the homeservers. Bare in mind that a knock and its acceptance may be days away from each other.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
### Membership change to `join`

The knock has been accepted by someone in the room.

The user who is accepting the knock must have the power level to perform
invites. The accepting user's homeserver will then send an invite - over federation if
necessary - to the knocking user. The knocking user may then join the room as
if they had been invited normally.

To accept a knock, the client should call `POST /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/ack_knock`
with a knock accept event, that also includes the event body of knock body in it, as signed by
the signature of knocking user's homeserver.

If the knocking user is on another homeserver, then the homeserver of the
accepting user will call [`POST /_matrix/federation/v2/ack_knock/{roomId}/{eventId}`]
on the knocking homeserver to inform it that the knock has been accepted and user has been
added to the room.
```

In this design, knock accept event also includes knock event in its body and if that knock event
supplied in the accept event (including its signature) mismatches a currently valid knock, then 
the join will be rejected.

Reviewer 13: Your design is still very patchy, and it's hard to validate it. Too many loose ends. You may want to draw a sequence diagram - for yourself, not here - and check what data flows through each API call before the next iteration; because either your explanation is too incomplete or you have gaps all over the design.
Just a few questions before I stopped trying to understand what you're proposing:
1. I understand that English is not your first language but please double-check what you are suggesting. `the event body of knock body` doesn't make any sense to me. Did you mean `the body of the knock event`?
2. What is "invite accept event"? Sorry but I couldn't find it across the spec and I can't get what you mean by that.
3. How does the client have the "accept event" (whatever it is) signed by the "receiving server" if it's just about to send this event to its homeserver?
4. Where does the client take the signature of the original knock event from? Clients normally don't receive event signatures as produced by remote servers, it's a prerogative of homeservers to generate and check them.

Reviewer 4: It's extremely hard to support autojoining without opening a can of worms/security vulnerability. This would be something that requires extensive thought and careful review, which won't be able to be provided over a comment thread on github. This is the sort of thing we'd solve in a later MSC and room version, after having this system in place as-is.

Knocking is a pretty big feature, so there's a good chance that this MSC isn't perfect. However, it's the best it can be before bikeshed laws start to take effect. Future MSCs can consider the cases where knocking fell short.

transaction to the remote homeserver, that homeserver would have no way to
validate the `prev_events` and `auth_events` that the event references. We
could send those events over as well, but those will also reference other
events that require validation and so on.

A simple thing we could easily do here is to trust the leave event implicitly
if it is sent by the homeserver we originally knocked through. We know this
homeserver is (or at least was) in the room, so they're probably telling the
truth. This is almost an edge case though, as while you'll knock through one
homeserver in the room, there's no guarantee that the admin that denies your
knock will be on the same homeserver you knocked through. Perhaps the
homeserver you knocked through could listen for this and then send the event
back to you - but what if it goes offline in the meantime?

As such, informing remote homeservers about the rejection of knocks over
federation is de-scoped for now, and left to a future MSC which can solve
this class of problem in a suitable way. Rejections should still work for the
homeservers that are in the room, as they can validate the leave event for

> they have access to the events it references.

Reviewer 17: Doesn't this mean that the knock will forever live on the users list as an active knock? They will never know that it has been rejected? This seems very suboptimal.

Should we provide an API to check the status of a knock that can be polled occasionally?

Reviewer 13: As the MSC says, this problem is not specific to knocks; and it is something that we live with, already. Note that its scale is limited to homeservers that are not already in the room; this will become more burning as we decentralise further but with the today's network it's more of a nuisance than a showstopper. Therefore rather than spend effort on patching the spot of nusance (forcing technical debt on client authors along the way), the underlying problem should be fixed by a separate MSC.

Reviewer 17: I see. Should we point this out some how that clients should be sure to hide old knocks as they may have been declined? The worse case I see here is that the user knocks again and either causes bother or gets a 403.

Reviewer 13: How would they determine if a knock is "old" though?

Reviewer 13: Also - getting a 403 is already a good sign that the user has been bumped; Quaternion uses exactly that kind of response to drop stale invites from the room list.

Reviewer 13: Hm, wait, actually there's no chance to get a 403 unless the user has been banned. Otherwise knocking again would just produce another knock, by the current reading of the MSC :(

Reviewer 17: I think that is the problem. There is no good answer for if a knock is old. But we should be explicit about that so that clients don't look around for a way to tell. Clients are then up to pick their UX for displaying knocks which may or may not have been answered.

Reviewer 4: This is unlikely to be a major problem in practice given how servers will most likely implement it, and the social scenarios in which it comes up. In particular, servers are likely to optimize out the second attempt at knocking, instead preferring to claim the user already knocked: the server wouldn't have the context that the knock was rejected, so as far as it is concerned the knock is still valid. A server could retry the knock over federation, though that means a whole federation round trip and perceived slowness - Synapse for instance doesn't try a join over federation if it thinks the user was banned, even if the ban may have been lifted.

If the server is lucky enough to be a member of the room through some other user, it will have seen the reject and can send it over `/sync` to the user. This is probably about half of the cases.

In the event a server does decide to retry the knock over federation, the room could end up being "spammed" with knocks or otherwise appear as abusive behaviour, though at the point where someone was declined a knock a ban isn't very far off. This is similar to being kicked from a room for spamming: the spammer would just rejoin and continue, being banned as a result. Rooms could skip the bans instead of just rejecting the knock, if they wanted. 

Knocking in the public federation is somewhat more likely to involve out-of-band processes which help guide people into the right room (for instance, if your matrix ID isn't known to a crowdfunding platforming, they could have you knock on a supporters room with a unique code to complete the link). Rooms which end up on the directory for the public federation are somewhat "doing it wrong" given they probably want to be publicly joinable instead (they would be inundated with spammy requests, regardless of people accidentally trying to knock twice).

In private federations, such as corporate deployments, it's more likely that the person knocking can be approached through some other means and told "hey, don't do that". Private federations would likely use the room directory for other reasons relating to discoverability, and would have different social representations of what that would mean.

This is definitely something we should fix, but I don't think it's a blocker for this MSC. The solution is likely far more complicated than this MSC can handle, and given the above I don't think this MSC would be blocked by a future MSC which fixes this problem. Instead, we should land knocking (with all of the notes and considerations I've outlined here, and are outlined in the MSC itself), and take a look at fixing unbans/rejections/etc over federation properly.

a membership state event into a room has been raised. This is an ongoing discussion
occurring at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403/files#r573180627.

# Client UX recommendations
After a knock is received in a room, it is expected to be displayed in the
timeline, similar to other membership changes. Clients can optionally add a way
for users of a room to review all current knocks.

Please also note the recommendations for clients in the "Security considerations"
section below.

# Security considerations
Clients must take care when implementing this feature in order to prevent
simple abuse vectors that can be accomplished by individual users. For
instance, when a knock occurs, clients are advised to hide the reason until
the user interacts with the client in some way (e.g. clicking on a "show
reason" button). The user should reveal the reason only if they choose to.

It is recommended to not display the reason by default as else this would
essentially allow outsiders to send messages into the room.

It is still theoretically possible for a homeserver admin to create many users
with different user IDs or display names, all spelling out an abusive

> message, and then having each of them knock in order.

Reviewer 17: This seems like questionable advise. I think most people would want to see the reason upfront, even if it may contain undesirable content. Something like:

> goodperson asked to join the room. "I like foxes."
> badperson asked to join the room. "I hate you all."

Maybe the wording should be changed to something like "Clients should be aware that the reason is arbitrary text that can come from any user and should consider options to hide the message by default for users who don't want to see hateful, violent or otherwise unpleasant content that may have been put in the `reason` field.

Also note that there is not much different between the reason and display name. Are most clients expected to display:

> Someone knocked in this room, click to see the information they provided.

I think there are cases where that makes sense. But advising this by default seems odd.

Reviewer 8: > should consider options to hide the message by default 

That will not work with application question use case, where the members actually want to read the answers of the knocker.

Reviewer 4: (worth noting that the spec cannot and should not prioritize examples of "harmful" content - the spec intentionally leaves "harmful" and similar such descriptors up to the implementations/users, not itself. What is harmful to one person might not be harmful to another, for better or worse.)

"Clients must take care..." can also mean "our user base doesn't care, so we show the reason verbatim". The wording would have to change before landing in the spec, but I believe the intention is to tell clients that there is a potential for abuse here and that they should consider that, even if that means doing nothing.

      the `state_key` is the invitee.
    - f.ii is justified as one user should not be able to knock on behalf of
      another user.
    - f.iii is justified as knocks should not be allowed if the knocking user
      has been banned from the room, is invited to the room or if they are already

>       in the room.

Reviewer 7: Doesn't this allow knock spam then?

Reviewer: Are you referring to the fact that knock->knock transitions are allowed? This has been noted before, and the current consensus is to enforce moderation in the form of banning the spammer/ACL'ing their homeserver or disabling knocking altogether until the spammer gets bored.

Existing discussions on the topic: 

https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403#discussion_r418128235
https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403#discussion_r529723767
https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403#discussion_r379017812

And the discussion resulting in allowing knock->knock:

https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403#discussion_r581226456

Note that client or homeserver implementations are free to automatically
accept this invite given they're aware that it's the result of a previous
knock. In case of failing to auto-accept an invite on the homeserver, it's
recommended for homeservers to pass the invite down to the client so that it
may try at a later point (or reject the potentially broken invite) at the user's

> discretion.

Reviewer 8: I oppose this because this means a non-client-initiated event. Interpreting invite+knock as join, on the other hand, does not entail server issuing events in behalf of client

Reviewer: The spec cannot stop homeservers from automatically accepting invites on a user's behalf.
